 

FOUNDER-ACARYA ©OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY FOR KRISHNA CONSCIOUSNESS

hs Drvine (nice Af. Bhaktivedanta Swami Pribhupada

THE SGIENGE OF

ORLE

 

 
THE SGIENGE OF

ORLF

PEAY
Readers interested in the subject matter of this book
are invited by the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
to correspond with its Secretary.

International Society for Krishna Consciousness
3764 Watseka Avenue
Los Angeles, California 90034

First Printing, 1977: 50,000 copies

Reprints of Prior Publications

© Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, 1968, 1969,

1970, 1971, 1972, 1973, 1974, 1975, 1976, 1977
All Rights Reserved

Printed in the United States of America

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 77-95065
International Standard Book Number: 0-89213-101-2
THE 5GIENGE OF

 

his Dione intice
Jb. bhakeivedanta Swan Pri

FOUNDER-ACARYA OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY FOR KRISHNA CONSCIOUSNESS
BOOKS by
His Divine Grace
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada

Bhagavad-gita As It Is

Srimad-Bhagavatam, Cantos 1-10 (50 Vols.)

Sri Caitanya-caritamrta-(17 Vols.)

Teachings of Lord Caitanya

The Nectar of Devotion

The Nectar of Instruction

Sri Isopanisad

Easy Journey to Other Planets

Krsna Consciousness: The Topmost Yoga System
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead (3 Vols.)
Perfect Questions, Perfect Answers

Dialectical Spiritualism— A Vedic View of Western Philosophy
Teachings of Lord Kapila, the Son of Devahtti
Transcendental Teachings of Prahlad Maharaja
Krsna, the Reservoir of Pleasure ~

The Science of Self-Realization

Preaching Is the Essence

Life Comes From Life

The Perfection of Yoga

Beyond Birth and Death

On the Way to Krsna

Geetar-gan (Bengali)

Raja-vidya: The King of Knowledge

Elevation to Krsna Consciousness

Krsna Consciousness: The Matchless Gift

Back to Godhead Magazine (Founder)

A complete catalog is available upon request.

' Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
3764 Watseka Avenue
Los Angeles, California 90034
 

Dedication

According to material vision, our beloved spiritual master, guide,
and friend His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupdda passed away from this world on November 14,
1977, but actually he is still present. As Srila Prabhupdda often
pointed out, there are two ways of associating with the spiritual
master: through his physical presence (vapu) and through his instructions (vani). Sometimes we can associate with the spiritual
master through his physical presence and sometimes not, but we
can always associate with him through his instructions.

—The Editors
Contents

Foreword ix
Introduction xv
Appreciations xvii

I. Learning the Science of the Soul

Seeing the Aim of Human Life 2
‘‘Your Original Consciousness is Krsna Consciousness”’ 10
‘‘Real Advancement Means Knowing God’ 18
Reincarnation and Beyond 25

Truth and Beauty 36

Relevant Inquiries 39

Soul Research 47

II. Choosing a Spiritual Master

What Isa Guru? 54
Separating the Saints From the Swindlers 61
‘With All the Humility at My Command” 70

III. Looking at the Cultural Background

India’s Greatest Impersonalist Meditated on Lord Krsna
and the Bhagavad-gita 82

The Krsna Consciousness Movement Is the Genuine
Vedic Way 90

Krsna Consciousness: Hindu Cult or Divine Culture? 105

IV. Understanding Krsna and Christ

Krsna or Christ—The Name Is the Same _ 112
Christ, Christians, and Krsna 120
Thou Shalt Not Kill 122
V. Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel

Superconsciousness 128

The Incarnation of Love of God = 133

Chanting the Hare Krsna Mahd-mantra 146

Krsna Consciousness—The Yoga for the Modern Age 149
Meditation and the Self Within 158

VI. Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills

Crime: Why and What to Do? 166

Can We Keep Society From Going to the Dogs? 173
The Supreme Welfare Work 182

Declaring Our Dependence on God _ 185

The Peace Formula 192

Spiritual Communism 194

The Tiny World of Modern Science 212

VII. Returning to the Eternal Religion

Srila Prabhupada Arrives in America 230

‘*Build Your Nations on the Spiritual Platform’? 234

‘‘A Devotee Always Feels Compassion for Others’
Distress” 243

‘They Have Given Everything to Krsna— And That Is
Never a Mistake” 254

An Awareness of What Is Best and Most Beautiful 259

VIII. Reaching Life’s Perfection

‘*The Human Form of Life Is Meant for God
Realization’? 270

The Highest Love 279

Approaching Krsna With Love 292

Appendixes
About the Author 305
Glossary 307
Guide to Sanskrit Pronunciation 319
General Index 321
Foreword

From the very start, I knew that His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada was the most extraordinary person I had ever met.
The first meeting occurred in the summer of 1966, in New York City. A
friend had invited me to hear a lecture by ‘‘an old Indian swami’’ on
lower Manhattan’s Bowery. Overwhelmed with curiosity about a swami
lecturing on skid row, I went there and felt my way up a pitch-black staircase. A bell-like, rhythmic sound got louder and clearer as I climbed
higher. Finally I reached the fourth floor and opened the door, and there
he was.

About fifty feet away from where I stood, at the other end of a long,
dark room, he sat on asmall dais, his face and saffron robes radiant under
a small light. He was elderly, perhaps sixty or so, I thought, and he sat
cross-legged in an erect, stately posture. His head was shaven, and his
powerful face and reddish horn-rimmed glasses gave him the look of a
monk who had spent most of his life absorbed in study. His eyes were
closed, and he softly chanted a simple Sanskrit prayer while playing a
hand drum. The small audience joined in at intervals, in call-andresponse fashion. A few played hand cymbals, which accounted for the
bell-like sounds I’d heard. Fascinated, I sat down quietly at the back,
tried to participate in the chanting, and waited.

After a few moments the swami began lecturing in English, apparently
from a huge Sanskrit volume that lay open before him. Occasionally he
would quote from the book, but more often from memory. The sound of
the language was beautiful, and he followed each passage with
meticulously detailed explanations.

He sounded like a scholar, his vocabulary intricately laced with philosophical terms and phrases. Elegant hand gestures and animated facial
expressions added considerable impact to his delivery. The subject matter was the most weighty I had ever encountered: “Il am not
this body. I am not an Indian. ... You are not Americans. ... We are all
Spirit souls....”’

After the lecture someone gave me a pamphlet printed in India. A
photo showed the swami handing three of his books to Indian Prime
Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri. The caption quoted Mr. Shastri as saying
that all Indian government libraries should order the books. °‘‘His Divine
Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada is doing great work,”’ the
x THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Prime Minister said in another small tract, ‘‘and his books are significant
contributions to the salvation of mankind.’’ I purchased copies of the
books, which [ learned the swami had brought over from India. After
reading the jacket flaps, the small pamphlet, and various other literature,
I began to realize that I had just met one of India’s most respected spiritual leaders.

But I could not understand why a gentleman of such distinction was
residing and lecturing in the Bowery, of all places. He was certainly well
educated and, by all appearances, born of an aristocratic Indian family.
Why was he living in such poverty? What in the world had brought him
here? One afternoon several days later, I stopped in to visit him and find
out.

To my surprise, Srila Prabhupada (as I later came to call him) was not
too busy to talk with me. In fact, it seemed that he was prepared to talk all
day. He was warm and friendly and explained that he had accepted the renounced order of life in India in 1959, and that he was not allowed to
Carry or earn money for his personal needs. He had completed his studies
at the University of Calcutta many years ago and had raised a family, and
then he had left his eldest sons in charge of family and business affairs, as
the age-old Vedic culture prescribes. After accepting the renounced
order, he had arranged a free passage on an Indian freighter (Scindia
Steamship Company’s Jaladuta) through an old family friend. In September 1965, he had sailed from Bombay to Boston, armed with only seven
dollars’ worth of rupees, a trunk of books, and a few clothes. His spiritual
master, His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, had entrusted him with delivering India’s Vedic teachings to the Englishspeaking world. And this was why, at age sixty-nine, he had come to
America. He told me he wanted to teach Americans about Indian music,
cooking, languages, and various other arts. I was mildly amazed.

I saw that Srila Prabhupdda slept on a small mattress and that his
clothes hung on lines at the back of the room, where they were drying in
the summer afternoon heat. He washed them himself and cooked his
own food on an ingenious utensil he had fashioned with his own hands in
India. In this four-layer apparatus he cooked four preparations at once.
Stacked all around him and his ancient-looking portable typewriter in
another section of the room were seemingly endless manuscripts. He
spent almost all of his waking hours—about twenty in twenty-four, I
learned—typing the sequels to the three volumes I had purchased. It was
a projected sixty-volume set called the Srimad-Bhdgavatam, and virtually
it was the encyclopedia of spiritual life. I wished him luck with the
Foreword xi

publishing, and he invited me back for Sanskrit classes on Saturdays and
for his evening lectures on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. I accepted,
thanked him, and left, marveling at his incredible determination.

A few weeks later—it was July 1966—I had the privilege of helping
Srila Prabhupada relocate in a somewhat more respectable neighborhood, on Second Avenue. Some friends and I pitched in and rented a
ground-floor storefront and a second-floor apartment, to the rear of a little courtyard, in the same building. The lectures and chanting continued,
and within two weeks a rapidly growing congregation was providing for
the storefront (by this time a temple) and the apartment. By now Srila
Prabhupada was instructing his followers to print and distribute leaflets,
and the owner of a record company had invited him to record an LP of
the Hare Krsna chant. He did, and it was a huge success. In his new location he was teaching chanting, Vedic philosophy, music, japa meditation,
fine art, and cooking. At first he cooked—he always taught by example.
The results were the most wonderful vegetarian meals I had ever experienced. (Srila Prabhupdda would even serve everything out himself!)
The meals usually consisted of a rice preparation, a vegetable dish,
capatis (tortilla-like whole wheat patties), and dahl (a zestfully spiced
mung bean or split pea soup). The spicing, the cooking medium—ghee,
or clarified butter—and the close attention paid to the cooking temperature and other details all combined to produce taste treats totally
unknown to me. Others’ opinions of the food, called prasdda (‘‘the
Lord’s mercy’’), agreed emphatically with mine. A Peace Corps worker
who was also a Chinese-language scholar was learning from Srila Prabhupada how to paint in the classical Indian style. I was startled at the high
quality of his first canvases.

In philosophical debate and logic Srila Prabhupdda was undefeatable
and indefatigable. He would interrupt his translating work for discussions
that would last up to eight hours. Sometimes seven or eight people
jammed into the small, immaculately clean room where he worked, ate,
and slept on a two-inch-thick foam cushion. Srila Prabhupada constantly
emphasized and exemplified what he called “‘plain living and high thinking.’ He stressed that spiritual life was a science provable through reason
and logic, not a matter of mere sentiment or blind faith. He began a
monthly magazine, and in the autumn of 1966 the New York Times
published a favorable picture story about him and his followers. Shortly
thereafter, television crews came out and did a feature news story.

Srila Prabhupada was an exciting person to know. Whether it was out
of my desire for the personal benefits of yoga and chanting or just out of

 
xii THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

raw fascination, I knew I wanted to follow his progress every step of the
way. His plans for expansion were daring and unpredictable —except for
the fact that they always seemed to succeed gloriously. He was seventyish
and a stranger to America, and he had arrived with practically nothing,
yet now, within a few months, he had singlehandedly started a movement! It was mind-boggling.

One August morning at the Second Avenue storefront temple, Srila
Prabhupada told us, ‘‘Today is Lord Krsna’s appearance day.’’ We would
observe a twenty-four-hour fast and stay inside the temple. That evening
some visitors from India happened along. One of them—practically in
tears—described his unbounded rapture at finding this little piece of
authentic India on the other side of the world. Never in his wildest
dreams could he have imagined such a thing. He offered Srila Prabhupada eloquent praise and deep thanks, left a donation, and bowed at his
feet. Everyone was deeply moved. Later, Srila Prabhupada conversed
with the gentleman in Hindi, and since what he was saying was unintelligible to me, I was able to observe how his every expression and
gesture communicated to the very core of the human soul.

Later that year, while in San Francisco, I sent Srila Prabhupada his first
airline ticket, and he flew out from New York. A sizeable group of us
greeted him at the terminal by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra. Then we
drove him to the eastern edge of Golden Gate Park, to a newly rented
apartment and storefront temple—an arrangement very similar to that in
New York. We had established a pattern. Srila Prabhupada was ecstatic.

A few weeks later the first mrdanga (a long clay drum with a playing
head on each end) arrived in San Francisco from India. When I went up
to Srila Prabhupdda’s apartment and informed him, his eyes opened
wide, and in an excited voice he told me to go down quickly and open the
crate. I took the elevator, got out on the ground floor, and was walking
toward the front door when Srila Prabhupada appeared. So eager was he
to see the mrdanga that he had taken the stairway and had beaten the
elevator. He asked us to open the crate, he tore off a piece of the saffron
cloth he was wearing, and, leaving only the playing heads exposed, he
wrapped the drum with the cloth. Then he said, ‘“This must never come
off,’’ and he began giving detailed instructions on how to play and care
for the instrument.

Also in San Francisco, in 1967, Srila Prabhupada inaugurated Rathayatra, the Festival of the Chariots, one of several festivals that, thanks to
him, people all over the world now observe. Ratha-yatra has taken place
in India’s Jagannatha Puri each year for two thousand years, and by 1975
Foreword | | xiii

the festival had become so popular with San Franciscans that the mayor
issued a formal proclamation—‘‘Ratha-yatra Day in San Francisco.’”’

By late 1966 Srila Prabhupada had begun accepting disciples. He was
quick to point out to everyone that they should think of him not as God
but as God’s servant, and he criticized self-styled gurus who let their disciples worship them as God. ‘‘These ‘gods’ are very cheap,’’ he used to
say. One day, after someone had asked, ‘‘Are you God?”’ Srila Prabhupada replied, ‘‘No, I am not God—I am a servant of God.’’ Then he
reflected a moment and went on. ‘‘Actually, Iam nota servant of God. I
am trying to be a servant of God. A servant of God is no ordinary thing.”’

In the mid-seventies Srila Prabhupada’s translating and publishing intensified dramatically. Scholars all over the world showered favorable
reviews on his books, and practically all the universities and colleges in
America accepted them as standard texts. Altogether he produced some
eighty books, which his disciples have translated into twenty-five
languages and distributed to the tune of fifty-five million copies. He
established one hundred eight temples worldwide, and he has some ten
thousand initiated disciples and a congregational following in the
millions. Srila Prabhupada was writing and translating up to the last days
of his eighty-one-year stay on earth.

Srila Prabhupada was not just another oriental scholar, guru, mystic,
yoga teacher, or meditation instructor. He was the embodiment of a
whole culture, and he implanted that culture in the West. To me and
many others he was first and foremost someone who truly cared, who
completely sacrificed his own comfort to work for the good of others. He
had no private life, but lived only for others. He taught spiritual science,
philosophy, common sense, the arts, languages, the Vedic way of life—
hygiene, nutrition, medicine, etiquette, family living, farming, social
organization, schooling, economics—and many more things to many
people. To me he was a master, a father, and my dearmost friend.

I am deeply indebted to Srila Prabhupada, and it is a debt I shall never
be able to repay. But I can at least show some gratitude by joining with his
other followers in fulfilling his innermost desire—publishing and distributing his books.

‘‘T shall never die,” Srila Prabhupada once said. ‘‘I shall live forever in
my books.’’ He passed away from this world on November 14, 1977, but
surely he will live forever.

Michael Grant
(Mukunda dasa)
Introduction

‘“‘Who is Srila Prabhupada?”’ people often ask, and it is always a hard
question to answer. For Srila Prabhupada always eclipsed conventional
designations. At various times people have called him a scholar, a philosopher, a cultural ambassador, a prolific author, a religious leader, a
Spiritual teacher, a social critic, and a holy man. In truth, he was all these
things and more. Certainly no one could ever have confused him with
the modern entrepreneurial ‘‘gurus’’ who come to the West with slickly
packaged, watered-down versions of Eastern spirituality (to satisfy our
urge for instant well-being and exploit our well-documented spiritual
naiveté). Srila Prabhupada was, rather, a true holy man (sddhu) of deep
intellectual and spiritual sensitivity—he had deep concern and compassion for a society which, to such a large degree, lacks real spiritual
dimension.

For the enlightenment of human society, Srila Prabhupada produced
some eighty volumes of translations and summary studies of India’s
great spiritual classics, and his work has seen print both in English
and in many foreign languages. Also, in 1944 Srila Prabhupada singlehandedly launched a magazine called Back to Godhead, which today has a
monthly circulation of more than half a million copies in English alone.
Nearly all the interviews, lectures, essays, and letters chosen for The
Science of Self-Realization first appeared in Back to Godhead.

In these pages Srila Prabhupada presents the same message that the
great sage Vyadsadeva recorded thousands of years ago, the message of
ancient India’s Vedic literatures. As we shall see, he quotes freely and
often from the Bhagavad-gitd, the Srimad-Bhdgavatam, and other classic
Vedic texts. He transmits in modern English the same timeless knowledge that other great self-realized teachers have spoken for millennia—
knowledge that opens up the secrets of the self within us, nature and the
universe, and the Supreme Self within and without. Srila Prabhupadda
speaks with startling clarity and a kind of convincing, simple eloquence
and proves just how relevant the science of self-realization is to our
modern world and our own lives.

Among the thirty-six selections chosen for this special book, we hear
Srila Prabhupada’s moving poem upon his arrival in America, his exchange with a noted cardiologist on ‘‘soul research,”’ his revelations to
London Broadcasting Company on reincarnation, his telling remarks to
the London Times on real and false gurus, his dialogue with a German

XV
xvi THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Benedictine monk on Krsna and Christ, his insights on superconsciousness and the law of karma, his conversation with a leading Russian
scholar on spiritual communism, and his intimate talk with his disciples
on the sham of modern science.

Read the selections in order, if you like, or start with the ones that first
catch your interest. (The glossary at the back will explain unfamiliar
words and names.) The Science of Self-Realization will challenge you and
bring you inspiration and enlightenment.

— The Publishers
hs >» ‘ CA
tt ad . ones *
: Po » od
é c
.

 

His Divine Grace
_ A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
Founder-Acarya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
PLATE TWO

Reincarnation of the soul, the first fact that we need to understand on
the path of spiritual enlightenment, is graphically shown here.... Asa
child grows, he becomes a boy, the boy becomes a young man, the young
man becomes an adult, and the adult becomes an old man. Throughout
all this time, although his body is changing from a child to an old man,
the person still feels that he has the same identity, the same “‘self.’’ But
what is this ‘‘self,’’ and what happens to it at the time of death? Lord
Krsna explains in the Bhagavad-gita (2.13 and 2.20), ‘‘Within the body is
the soul [the ‘‘self’’], and just as the soul passes from one’s infant body
to his youthful body, and from his youthful body to his aged body, so the
Same soul passes into another body at death.... For the soul there is
never birth nor death. Nor, having once been, does he ever cease to be.
He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undying, and primeval. He does not
perish when the body perishes.’’ Later in the Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna
compares the process of changing bodies to discarding an old set of
clothes and donning a new set. But the soul’s ‘‘new set of clothes’’ —his
new body—need not be human. There are 8,400,000 species, including
all kinds of one-celled creatures, aquatics, plants, reptiles, insects,
beasts, and human beings. By the law of karma, what kind of body a person gets in his next life depends on the acts he performs and the desires
he cultivates in this life. (pp. 25-35)
 
PLATE THREE

Whether boss or laborer, master or servant, president or prisoner,
everyone in this world is under the tight control of the three modes of
material nature (goodness, passion, and ignorance), which in turn are
controlled by Lord Krsna. It is only out of illusion that people imagine
themselves to be free. (After all, is anyone free to prevent his own
death?) As Krsna explains in the Bhagavad-gita (3.27): ‘‘The bewildered
Spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material nature,
thinks himself to be the doer of activities that are in actuality carried out
by nature.” (pp. 25-35)
 
i a a
at 3 - os

PLATE FOUR

Since a human being is a rational animal, he is born to make inquiries. But the most relevant inquiries—those made by the truly intelligent men—deal with what happens at the
time of death. This scene from the great Vedic history Srimad-Bhagavatam shows King
Pariksit placing such inquiries before his spiritual master, Sukadeva Goswami. A young
brahmana boy had cursed King Pariksit, who ruled the entire world five thousand years
ago, to meet death from a serpent’s bite within seven days. Upon learning of the curse, the
king at once left his palatial home and went to the bank of the Ganges to fast until death.
All the great sages assembled there, and at last Sukadeva Goswami, one of the most exalted spiritualists of the time, arrived. King Pariksit offered Sukadeva Goswami the principal seat of esteem and then spoke to him as follows: “‘My dear sir, you are the greatest of
the great transcendentalists, and therefore I submissively beg to ask you about my duties
at this critical hour. I am just on the verge of death. Please tell me, my lord—what should |
hear, what should I worship, and whom should I remember now?” (pp. 39-46)

f

 
 
PLATE FIVE

Five thousand years ago, on the sacred field of Kuruksetra, in India,
the greatest battle in history was about to take place. On one side stood
the legions of Arjuna, the most valiant warrior of his day and the personal
friend of Lord Sri Krsna. Opposite them stood the vast military array of
Dhrtarastra, usurper of the throne, and father of the evil Duryodhana.
When Arjuna asked Krsna to draw his chariot between the two armies,
what Arjuna saw struck him with grief and paralyzed his will to fight:
among his enemies were close friends, relatives, and teachers. Bemoaning his condition, Arjuna addressed his friend and charioteer: “‘My dear
Krsna, now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because of weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me clearly
what is best for me. Now I am Your disciple and a soul surrendered unto
You. Please instruct me.’’ Then Lord Krsna spoke the Bhagavad-gita for
Arjuna’s enlightenment. (pp. 82-89)
*

ar \ a
_~ _ .
a Te REO
. ‘a bs ™ . . _- XY
‘ ~ & .
= ; se 2 , a

oe

 
PLATE SIX

Five hundred years ago Lord Krsna appeared in His most merciful incarnation—Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. During His manifest existence on
earth, Lord Caitanya transformed the face of India in four respects: philosophically, by encountering, defeating, and converting the greatest philosophers of His day; religiously, by organizing the largest, most
widespread theistic movement in India’s history; socially, by His strong
challenges against the religious inequities of the caste system; and
politically, by His organization of a massive civil disobedience movement
in Bengal, India, four hundred fifty years before Gandhi. Lord Caitanya’s
chief ‘‘weapon’’ in His effort to convert the Indian masses to the path of
krsna-bhakti (devotional service to Lord Krsna) was sankirtana, the congregational chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra. Here, before thousands
of His followers, we see Lord Caitanya performing sankirtana with His
closest associates, including Sri Nityananda Prabhu (clad in blue), who is
an incarnation of Lord Balarama. Lord Caitanya Himself summed up the
glories of Hare Krsna sankirtana in the first of His Eight Instructions on the
Holy Name: ‘‘Let there be all victory for the chanting of the holy name of
Lord Krsna, which can cleanse the mirror of the heart and stop the miseries of the blazing fire of material existence. The chanting of the Hare
Krsna mantra is the waxing moon that spreads the white lotus of good
fortune for all living entities. It is the life and soul of all education and expands the blissful ocean of transcendental life. It gives a cooling effect to
everyone and enables everyone to taste full nectar at every step.’’
(pp. 133-45)
 
PLATE SEVEN

Real meditation means to achieve a state in which the mind Is saturated with God consciousness. The easiest process of meditation in this
age is to chant the holy names of God, but in past ages, as we see here,
the process was silent meditation within. The Vedic scriptures describe
this mystic yoga process as follows: °“‘First one should go to a secluded,
sacred place, lay kusa grass on the ground, and then cover it with a
deerskin and a soft cloth. The seat should be neither too high nor too low.
Then one should sit on it very firmly and practice yoga by controlling the
senses and the breathing, purifying the heart, and fixing the mind on one
point. One should hold his body, neck, and head erect in a straight line
and stare steadily at the tip of the nose. Thus, with an unagitated, subdued mind, devoid of fear, completely free from sex life, one should
meditate upon the form of Lord Visnu within the heart. Lord Visnu is
eternally very beautiful, ever youthful, and always eager to bestow His
blessings upon those who meditate on Him and serve Him. One should
therefore meditate on the eternal form of the Lord until the mind becomes fixed. Then, by the Lord’s causeless mercy, He will become
manifest before one’s purified vision.”’ (pp. 158-64)
 
PLATE EIGHT

Modern scientists guess that the universe was created by an exploding
chunk, a mass of gas, or some other inanimate source. But from the
Vedas, the reservoir of infallible knowledge, we learn of the real source of
creation—Lord Krsna. Here we see Lord Krsna’s partial expansion
Maha-Visnu lying in the Causal Ocean. While He sleeps in that ocean,
millions of universes are generated as He exhales. A second expansion,
Garbhodakasayi Visnu, enters all the universes to create diversities in
each of them. From the navel of Garbhodakasayi Visnu springs the stem
of a lotus flower, the birthplace of Brahma, who is the father of all living
beings and the master of all the demigod-engineers. It is Lord Brahma
who creates each universe, using his fine intelligence to manipulate the
gross elements supplied by Krsna and His expansions. (pp. 212-28)
 
PLATE NINE

In search of the original cause of everything—‘‘the cause of all
causes’ —modern scientists have delved deeply into the atem and found
electrons, protons, pi-mesons, and many other particles. But they have
failed to find the ultimate subatomic particle—the Supersoul, an expansion of Lord Krsna—because they know nothing of the spiritual science
of bhakti-yoga. By entering into every atom (and into the heart of every
living being), the Supersoul pervades, sustains, and controls the entire
material creation. From the Supersoul comes all knowledge, remembrance, and even consciousness itself. But because the atheistic
scientists can never receive His mercy, they cannot perceive Him, and
thus for them the mystery of creation will remain unsolved. (pp. 2/2-28)
 
PLATE TEN

The goal of human life is to enter into a transcendental loving relationship with Lord Krsna, and here we see the epitome of such love: the
Supreme Lord Krsna and His eternal consort, Radha (His personified
pleasure potency), meet at night in the lush forest of Vrndavana. Here
everything is meant to enhance Their enjoyment. Peacocks dance before
Them, gentle breezes carry the fragrance of lotus, jasmine, and mallika,
and the full moon shining above the Yamuna sheds a soft illumination
throughout the forest. Despite appearances, we should never think that
the loving affairs of Radha and Krsna in Vrndavana are like the lusty
affairs of young boys and girls in this material world. No trace of lust mars
Their relationship, for it is based simply on concern for each other’s happiness. Sri Radha expresses the perfection of this selfless, loving mood:
‘‘Krsna is My life and soul. Krsna is the treasure of My life. Indeed,
Krsna is the very life of My life. I therefore keep Him always in My heart
and try to please Him by rendering service.’’ Imbued with this pure sentiment, Radha gives Herself in charity to the lotus feet of Krsna, who accepts Her as His loved one and calls Her His most beloved. (pp. 279-91)
 
PLATE ELEVEN

When Krsna walked this earth five thousand years ago, all the residents of Vrndavana showed the perfect way to love Him. Indeed, they
knew nothing but Krsna. The milkmaids (gopis) especially felt great bliss
when they saw Krsna and His brother, Balarama, entering the Vrndavana
forest in the morning. One gopi would say to another, ‘‘My dear friend,
how is it Krsna and Balarama are looking so beautiful this morning? They
look just like two actors going to play on a stage. I think those who see the
beautiful faces of Krsna and Balarama are certainly fortunate. As these
two sons of King Nanda enter the forest, surrounded by Their friends
and driving the cows before Them, They glance lovingly upon us and the
other residents of Vrndavana. For those who have eyes, we think there is
no greater object of vision.’ But then, fearing Krsna’s imminent absence, one gopi would say, ‘‘O Krsna, when You go to the forest during
the day and we do not see Your sweet face, which is surrounded by
beautiful curling hair, half a second seems as long as an entire age for us.
Dear Krsna, our life rests only in You. So we are filled with anxiety to
think that sharp stones might injure Your tender feet as You roam about
on the forest path.’’ (pp. 292-302)
 
Appreciations of Srila Prabhupada’s Work

Over the years many people have expressed their appreciation for Srila
Prabhupada’s work—bringing India’s timeless science of self-realization

to the West.
* kK *

‘*His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada is doing
valuable work, and his books are significant contributions to the salvation of mankind.”’

Sri Lal Bahadur Shastri
former prime minister of India

**Swami Bhaktivedanta brings to the West a salutary reminder that our
highly activistic and one-sided culture is faced with a crisis that may end
in self-destruction because it lacks the inner depth of an authentic
metaphysical consciousness. Without such depth, our moral and political
protestations are just so much verbiage. ”’

Thomas Merton, theologian

‘‘In the diversity of religious approaches offered by the yogis of India
the most significant of course is the way of Krsna consciousness, shown
by Srila Prabhupada Bhaktivedanta Swami, tenth teacher in the tradition
of Mahaprabhu Caitanya. It is amazing to see how Sri Bhaktivedanta
Swami has in less than ten years succeeded by his personal devotion and
single-minded dedication to the task, untiring energy and efficient direction, in organizing the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
having thousands of devotees, opening the Radha-Krsna temples in the
major cities of the world and writing numerous works on the bhakti-yoga
as taught by Sri Krsna and Sri Caitanya.””

Professor Mahesh Mehta
Professor of Asian Studies
University of Windsor, Ontario, Canada

*°A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupdada is a prestigious master and
heir to a great tradition.”’

Joseph Jean Lanzo del Vasto
prominent French philosopher and author

Xvi
xviii THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

*“Words fail me to describe the height of scholarship and devotion
manifest in Srila Prabhupdda’s vast writings. Our future generations will
definitely find a better world to live in through the efforts of Srila Prabhupada. He stands for international brotherhood and the spiritual integration of all mankind. The literary world outside India, particularly of the
West, is indebted to Srila Prabhupada, who has so scientifically acquainted them with what is best in Krsna conscious India.”’

Sri Viswanath Shukla Ph.D.
Professor of Hindi, M.U. Aligarh, U.P., India

‘*As a native of India now living in the West, it has given me much
grief to see so many of my fellow countrymen coming to the West in the
role of gurus and spiritual leaders. Just as any ordinary man in the West
becomes conscious of Christian culture from his very birth, any ordinary
man in India becomes familiar with the principles of meditation and yoga
from his very birth. Unfortunately, many unscrupulous persons come
from India, exhibit their imperfect and ordinary knowledge of yoga,
cheat the people with their wares consisting of mantras, and present
themselves as incarnations of God. So many of these cheaters have come
convincing their foolish followers to accept them as God, that those who
are actually well-versed and learned in Indian culture have become very
concerned and troubled. For this reason, I am very excited to see the
publications of Sri A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada. They will
help to stop the terrible cheating of false and unauthorized ‘gurus’ and
‘yogis’, and will give an opportunity to all people to understand the actual
meaning of Oriental culture.”’

Dr. Kailash Vajpeye
Director of Indian Studies
Center for Oriental Studies, The University of Mexico

‘‘The books of A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada are not only
beautiful, but also relevant to our times, as we as a nation search for new
cultural patterns for our way of life.”’

Dr. C. L. Spreadbury
Professor of Sociology
Stephen F. Austin State University

‘*It is a great honor for me to have the pleasure of examining the
publications of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, which I find to be of

 
Appreciations xix

exceptional value for use in educational institutions and libraries. I particularly recommend the ancient classic Srimad-Bhdgavatam to all students and professors of Indian philosophy and culture. The learned
author, His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami, is a worldrenowned saint and savant in the field of Vedic philosophy and its practical application in the modern world. He has established over one
hundred spiritual ashrams, for the study and cultivation of Vedic knowledge, throughout the world. Factually, he is unequaled in his efforts to
establish the Vedic way of life, sandtana-dharma, in all countries of the
world. Certainly, I am most grateful that this message of the Bhdgavata is
being spread for the benefit of the world by such a qualified personality as
Swami Bhaktivedanta.”’

Dr. R. Kalia
President, Indian Library Association

‘*“Swami Bhaktivedanta has offered to devotees of God a blessed service with his English translations and commentaries. The universal application of these truths is shown to be a promised blessing in these times
of challenge when light is illumining darkness. Truly this is a holy, inspired writing for all aspiring souls seeking the why, whence and whither

° y°?
of lifer” pr. Judith M. Tyberg
Founder and Director
East-West Cultural Center, Los Angeles, California

**,.. AS asuccessor in direct line from Caitanya, the author is entitled,
according to Indian custom, to the majestic title of His Divine Grace
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupadda. Swami Prabhupada possesses
total mastery of the Sanskrit language. The great interest that his reading
of the Bhagavad-gita holds for us is that it offers us an-authorized interpretation according to the principles of the Caitanya tradition. ... This
appreciation, coming from a Christian philosopher and Indologist, is a
gesture of sincere friendship.”’

Olivier Lacombe

Professeur Honoraire

Université de Paris, Sorbonne |

former Director, Institute of Indian Civilization, Paris

“‘T have read Sri Bhaktivedanta Swami’s books with great care, attention, and profound interest, and have found them to be of incalculable
xx THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

value to anyone who is curious about India’s spiritual and cultural
heritage. The author of these books displays on every page an astounding
scholarship in the subjects treated, and also an understanding and ease of
exposition of abstruse ideas, which are rarest gifts of a man who has been
rigorously brought up in the schools of Vaisnava philosophy and has absorbed its teachings so fully that he seems to have reached the highest
state of spiritual illumination only few blessed souls achieve.”’

Dr. H. B. Kulkarni
Professor of English and Philosophy
Utah State University, Logan, Utah

‘Undoubtedly, the work of Swamiji is a great contribution to the
troubled human society of today’s world.”’

Dr. Sooda L. Bhatt
Professor of Indian Languages
Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts

‘‘The appearance of an English translation of Krsnadasa Kavirdaja
Goswami’s Sri Caitanya-caritamrta by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada is a cause for celebration among both scholars in Indian
studies and lay people seeking to enrich their knowledge of Indian
spirituality. ,

**.,. Anyone who gives a close reading to the commentary will sense
that here, as in his other works, Sri Bhaktivedanta has combined a healthy mixture of the fervent devotion and aesthetic sensitivity of a devotee
and the intellectual rigor of a textual scholar.

**. . .These exquisitely wrought volumes will be a welcome addition to
the libraries of all persons who are committed to the study of Indian spirituality and religious literature, whether their interests are sparked by the
motivations of the scholar, the devotee or the general reader.”’

Dr. J. Bruce Long
Department of Asian Studies, Cornell University
Learning

Science
of the Soul

 
Seeing the Aim of Human Life

“At present, human society is being misled by leaders who are blind, for they
do not know the aim and objective of human life, which is self-realization and
the reestablishment of our lost relationship with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.... The Krsna consciousness movement is trying to enlighten
human society in this important matter.”

This very important Krsna consciousness movement is meant to save
human society from spiritual death. At present human society is being
misled by leaders who are blind, for they do not know the aim and objective of human life, which is self-realization and the reestablishment of
our lost relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is
the missing point. The Krsna consciousness movement is trying to
enlighten human society in this important matter.

According to Vedic civilization, the perfection of life is to realize one’s
relationship with Krsna, or God. In the Bhagavad-gita, which is accepted
by all authorities in transcendental science as the basis of all Vedic
knowledge, we understand that not only human beings but all living entities are parts and parcels of God. The parts are meant for serving the
whole, just as the legs, hands, fingers, and ears are meant for serving the
total body. We living entities, being parts and parcels of God, are dutybound to serve Him.

Actually our position is that we are always rendering service to someone, either to our family, country, or society. If we have no one to serve,
sometimes we keep a pet cat or dog and render service to it. All these factors prove that we are constitutionally meant to render service, yet in
Spite of serving to the best of our ability, we are not satisfied. Nor is the
Learning the Science of the Soul 3

person to whom we are rendering that service satisfied. On the material
platform, everyone is frustrated. The reason for this is that the service
being rendered is not properly directed. For example, if we want to
render service to a tree, we must water the root. If we pour water on the
leaves, branches, and twigs, there is little benefit. If the Supreme Personality of Godhead is served, all other parts and parcels will be automatically satisfied. Consequently all welfare activities as well as service to
society, family, and nation are realized by serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

It is the duty of every human being to understand his constitutional
position with God and to act accordingly. If this is possible, then our lives
become successful. Sometimes, however, we feel challenging and say,
*‘There is no God,”’ or ‘‘I am God,”’ or even, ‘‘I don’t care for God.”’
But in actuality this challenging spirit will not save us. God is there, and
we can see Him at every moment. If we refuse to see God in our life, then
He will be present before us as cruel death. If we do not choose to see
Him in one feature, we will see Him in another. There are different
features of the Supreme Personality of Godhead because He is the
original root of the entire cosmic manifestation. In one sense, it is not
possible for us to escape Him.

This Krsna consciousness movement is not blind religious fanaticism,
mor is it a revolt by some recent upstart; rather, it is an authorized, scientific approach to the matter of our eternal necessity in relation with the
Absolute Personality of Godhead, the Supreme Enjoyer. Krsna consciousness simply deals with our eternal relationship with Him and the
process of discharging our relative duties to Him. Thus, Krsna consciousness enables us to achieve the highest perfection of life attainable in the
present human form of existence.

We must always remember that this particular form of human life is attained after an evolution of many millions of years in the cycle of
transmigration of the spirit soul. In this particular form of life, the economic question is more easily solved than in the lower, animal forms.
There are swine, dogs, camels, asses, and so on whose economic
necessities are just as important as ours, but the economic questions of
these animals and others are solved under primitive conditions, whereas
the human being is given all the facilities of leading a comfortable life by
the laws of nature.

Why is a man given a better chance to live than swine or other
animals? Why is a highly posted government officer given better facilities
for a comfortable life than an ordinary clerk? The answer is very simple:
4 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

the important officer has to discharge duties of a more responsible nature
than those of an ordinary clerk. Similarly, the human being has to discharge higher duties than the animals, who are always busy with filling
their hungry stomachs. But by the laws of nature, the modern animalistic
standard of civilization has only increased the problems of filling the
stomach. When we approach some of these polished animals for spiritual
life, they say that they only want to work for the satisfaction of their
stomachs and that there is no necessity of inquiring about the Godhead.
Yet despite their eagerness to work hard, there is always the question of
unemployment and so many other impediments incurred by the laws of
nature. Despite this, they still denounce the necessity of acknowledging
the Godhead.

We are given this human form of life not just to work hard like the
swine or dog, but to attain the highest perfection of life. If we do not want
that perfection, then we will have to work very hard, for we will be forced
to by the laws of nature. In the closing days of Kali-yuga (this present
age) men will have to work hard like asses for only a scrap of bread. This
process. has already begun, and every year the necessity for harder work
for lesser wages will increase. Yet human beings are not meant to work
hard like animals, and if a man fails to discharge his duties as a human
being, he is forced to transmigrate to the lower species of life by the laws
of nature. The Bhagavad-gita very vividly describes how a spirit soul, by
the laws of nature, takes his birth and gets a suitable body and sense
organs for enjoying matter in the material world.

In the Bhagavad-gitd it is also stated that those who attempt but do not
complete the path of approaching God—in other words, those who have
failed to achieve complete success in Krsna consciousness—are given the
chance to appear in the families of the spiritually advanced or in financially well-to-do mercantile families. If the unsuccessful spiritual
aspirants are offered such chances of noble parentage, what of those who
have actually attained the required success? Therefore an attempt to go
back to Godhead, even if half finished, guarantees a good birth in the
next life. Both the spiritual and the financially well-to-do families are
beneficial for spiritual progress because in both families one can get a
good chance to make further progress from the point where he stopped in
his previous birth. In spiritual realization the atmosphere generated by a
good family is favorable for the cultivation of spiritual knowledge. The
Bhagavad-gita reminds such fortunate well-born persons that their good
fortune is due to their past devotional activities. Unfortunately the
Learning the Science of the Soul | 5

children of these families do not consult the Bhagavad-gitd, being
misguided by maya (illusion).

Birth in a well-to-do family solves the problem of having to find sufficient food from the beginning of life, and later a comparatively easier and
more comfortable way of life can be led. Being so situated, one has a good
chance to make progress in spiritual realization, but as ill luck would
have it, due to the influence of the present iron age (which is full of
machines and mechanical people) the sons of the wealthy are misguided
for sense enjoyment, and they forget the good chance they have for
spiritual enlightenment. Therefore nature, by her laws, is setting fires in
these golden homes. It was the golden city of Lanka, under the regime of
the demonic Ravana, that was burned to ashes. That is the law of nature.

The Bhagavad-gita is the preliminary study of the transcendental
science of Krsna consciousness, and it is the duty of all responsible heads
of state to chalk out their economic and other programs by referring to
the Bhagavad-gita. We are not meant to solve economic questions of life
by balancing on a tottering platform; rather, we are meant to solve the
ultimate problems of life which arise due to the laws of nature. Civilization is static unless there is spiritual movement. The soul moves the
body, and the living body moves the world. We are concerned about the
body, but we have no knowledge of the spirit that is moving that body.
Without the spirit, the body is motionless, or dead.

The human body is an excellent vehicle by which we can reach eternal
life. It is a rare and very important boat for crossing over the ocean of
nescience which is material existence. On this boat there is the service of
an expert boatman, the spiritual master. By divine grace, the boat plies
the water in a favorable wind. With all these auspicious factors, who
would not take the opportunity to cross over the ocean of nescience? If
one neglects this good chance, it should be known that he is simply committing suicide.

There is certainly a great deal of comfort in the first-class coach of a
train, but if the train does not move toward its destination, what is the
benefit of an air-conditioned compartment? Contemporary civilization is
much too concerned with making the material body comfortable. No one
has information of the real destination of life, which is to go back to
Godhead. We must not just remain seated in a comfortable compartment; we should see whether or not our vehicle is moving toward its real
destination. There is no ultimate benefit in making the material body
comfortable at the expense of forgetting the prime necessity of life,
6 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

which is to regain our lost spiritual identity. The boat of human life is
constructed in such a way that it must move toward a spiritual destination. Unfortunately this body is anchored to mundane consciousness by
five strong chains, which are: (1) attachment to the material body due to
ignorance of spiritual facts, (2) attachment to kinsmen due to bodily relations, (3) attachment to the land of birth and to material possessions
such as house, furniture, estates, property, business papers, etc.,
(4) attachment to material science, which always remains mysterious for
want of spiritual light, and (5) attachment to religious forms and holy
rituals without knowing the Personality of Godhead or His devotees,
who make them holy. These attachments, which anchor the boat of the
human body, are explained in detail in the Fifteenth Chapter of the
Bhagavad-gita. There they are compared to a deeply rooted banyan tree
which is ever increasing its hold on the earth. It is very difficult to uproot
such a strong banyan tree, but the Lord recommends the following process: “‘The real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No
one can understand where it ends, where it begins, or where its foundation is. But with determination one must cut down this tree with the
weapon of detachment. So doing, one must seek that place from which,
having once gone, one never returns, and there surrender to that
Supreme Personality of Godhead from whom everything has begun and
in whom everything is abiding since time immemorial.” [Bg. 15.3-4]
Neither the scientists nor speculative philosophers have yet arrived at
any conclusion concerning the cosmic situation. All they have done is
posit different theories about it. Some of them say that the material world
is real, others say that it is a dream, and yet others say that it is ever
existing. In this way different views are held by mundane scholars, but
the fact is that no mundane scientist or speculative philosopher has ever
discovered the beginning of the cosmos or its limitations. No one can say
when it began or how it floats in space. They theoretically propose some
laws, like the law of gravitation, but actually they cannot put this law to
practical use. For want of actual knowledge of the truth, everyone is anxious to promote his own theory to gain certain fame, but the actual fact is
that this material world is full of miseries and that no one can overcome
them simply by promoting some theories about the subject. The Personality of Godhead, who is fully cognizant of everything in His creation,
informs us that it is in our best interest that we desire to get out of this
miserable existence. We must detach ourselves from everything
material. To make the best use of a bad bargain, our material existence
must be one-hundred-percent spiritualized. Iron is not fire, but it can be
Learning the Science of the Soul 7

turned into fire by constant association with fire. Similarly, detachment
from material activities can be effected by spiritual activities, not by
material inertia. Material inertia is the negative side of material action,
but spiritual activity is not only the negation of material action but the activation of our real life. We must be anxious to search out eternal life, or
spiritual existence in Brahman, the Absolute. The eternal kingdom of
Brahman is described in the Bhagavad-gita as that eternal country from
which no one returns. That is the kingdom of God.

The beginning of our present material life cannot be traced, nor is it
necessary for us to know how we became conditioned in material existence. We have to be satisfied with the understanding that somehow or
other this material life has been going on since time immemorial and now
our duty is to surrender unto the Supreme Lord, who is the original cause
of all causes. The preliminary qualification for going back to Godhead is
given in the Bhagavad-gita [15.5]: ‘‘One who is free from illusion, false
prestige, and false association, who understands the eternal, who is done
with material lust and is free from the duality of happiness and distress,
and who knows how to surrender unto the Supreme Person attains that
eternal kingdom.”’

One who is convinced of his spiritual identity and is freed from the
material conception of existence, who is free from illusion and is transcendental to the modes of material nature, who constantly engages in
understanding spiritual knowledge and who has completely severed himself from sense enjoyment can go back to Godhead. Such a person is
called amudha, as distinguished from mudha, or the foolish and ignorant,
for he is freed from the duality of happiness and distress.

And what is the nature of the kingdom of God? It is described in the
Bhagavad-gita {15.6] as follows: ‘‘That abode of Mine is not illumined by
the sun or moon, nor by electricity. One who reaches it never returns to
this material world.’’

Although every place in the creation is within the kingdom of God
because the Lord is the supreme proprietor of all planets, there is still the
Lord’s personal abode, which is completely different from the universe
in which we are now living. And this abode is called paramam, or the
supreme abode. Even on this earth there are countries where the standard of living is high and countries where the standard of living is low.
Besides this earth, there are innumerable other planets distributed all
over the universe, and some are considered superior places and some inferior places. In any case, all planets within the jurisdiction of the external energy, material nature, require the rays of a sun or the light of fire
8 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

for their existence because the material universe is a region of darkness.
Beyond this region, however, is a spiritual realm, which is described as
functioning under the superior nature of God. That realm is described in
the Upanisads thus: ‘“There is no need of sun, moon, or stars, nor is that
abode illumined by electricity or any form of fire. All these material universes are illumined by a reflection of that spiritual light, and because
that superior nature is always self-luminous, we can experience a glow of
light even in the densest darkness of night.’’ In the Hari-vamsa the spiritual nature is explained by the Supreme Lord Himself as follows: ““The
glaring effulgence of the impersonal Brahman [the impersonal Absolute]
illuminates all existences, both material and spiritual. But, O Bharata,
you must understand that this Brahman illumination is the effulgence of
My body.”’ In the Brahma-samhitd this conclusion is also confirmed. We
should not think that we can attain that abode by any material means
such as spaceships, but we should know for certain that one who can attain that spiritual abode of Krsna can enjoy eternal, spiritual bliss without
interruption. As fallible living entities, we have two phases of existence.
One is called material existence, which is full of the miseries of birth,
death, old age, and disease, and the other is called spiritual existence, in
which there is an incessant spiritual life of eternity, bliss, and knowledge.
In material existence we are ruled by the material conception of the body
and the mind, but in spiritual existence we can always relish the happy,
transcendental contact of the Personality of Godhead. In spiritual existence, the Lord is never lost to us.

The Krsna consciousness movement is trying to bring that spiritual existence to humanity at large. In our present material consciousness, we
are attached to the sensual material conception of life, but this conception can be removed at once by devotional service to Krsna, or Krsna
consciousness. If we adopt the principles of devotional service, we can
become transcendental to the material conceptions of life and be liberated from the modes of goodness, passion, and ignorance, even in the
midst of various material engagements. Everyone who is engaged in
material affairs can derive the highest benefit from the pages of Back to
Godhead and the other literatures of this Krsna consciousness movement. These literatures help all people sever the roots of the indefatigable banyan tree of material existence. These literatures are authorized to
train us to renounce everything related to the material conception of life
and to relish spiritual nectar in every object. This stage is obtainable only
by devotional service and nothing else. By rendering such service, one
can at once get liberation (mukti) even during this present life. Most
Learning the Science of the Soul 9

spiritual endeavors are tinged with the colors of materialism, but pure
devotional service is transcendental to all material pollution. Those who
desire to go back to Godhead need only adopt the principles of this Krsna
consciousness movement and simply aim their consciousness at the lotus
feet of the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, Krsna.
‘Your Original Consciousness
Is Krsna Consciousness”’

“Your original consciousness is Krsna consciousness, ” Srila Prabhupdda tells

freelance reporter Sandy Nixon. “Now your consciousness is covered with so
much rubbish. You have to cleanse it, and then— Krsna consciousness. Our
consciousness is like water. Water is by nature clear and transparent, but
sometimes it becomes muddy. If you filter all the mud out of the water, it again
comes to its original clear, transparent state.”

Ms. Nixon: My first question is very basic. What is Krsna consciousness?

Srila Prabhupada: ‘“‘Krsna’? means God. We are all intimately connected with Him because He is our original father. But we have forgotten
this connection. When we become interested in knowing, ‘‘What is my
connection with God? What is the aim of life?’’ then we are called Krsna
conscious.

Ms. Nixon: How does Krsna consciousness develop in the practitioner?

Srila Prabhupada: Krsna consciousness is already there in the core of
everyone’s heart. But because of our materially conditioned life, we have
forgotten it. The process of chanting the Hare Krsna mahdad-mantra—Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,
Rama Rama, Hare Hare—revives the Krsna consciousness we already
have. For example, a few months ago these American and European
boys and girls did not know about Krsna, but just yesterday we saw how
they were chanting Hare Krsna and dancing in ecstasy throughout the
whole Ratha-yatra procession [an annual festival sponsored by the Krsna
consciousness movement in cities around the world]. Do you think that
was artificial? No. Artificially, nobody can chant and dance for hours
together. They have actually awakened their Krsna consciousness by
following a bona fide process. This is explained in the Caitanya-caritamrta
[Madhya 22.107]:

nitya-siddha krsna-prema ‘sadhya’ kabhu naya
Sravanadi-Suddha-citte karaye udaya

10
Learning the Science of the Soul 11

Kgsna consciousness is dormant in everyone’s heart, and when one
cumes in contact with devotees, it is awakened. Krsna consciousness is
mot artificial. Just as a young boy awakens his natural attraction for a
young girl in her association, similarly, if one hears about Krsna in the
association of devotees, he awakens his dormant Krsna consciousness.
Bs. Nixon: What is the difference between Krsna consciousness and
Qhrist consciousness?
Sella Prabhupada: Christ consciousness is also Krsna consciousness,
but because at present people do not follow the rules and regulations of
Chnstianity—the commandments of Jesus Christ—they do not come to
the standard of God consciousness.
Ms. Nixon: What is unique about Krsna consciousness among all
sehigions?
Goala Prabhupada: Primarily, religion means to know God and to love
Ham. That is religion. Nowadays, because of a lack of training, nobody
kmows God, what to speak of loving Him. People are satisfied simply
going to church and praying, *“‘O God, give us our daily bread.’’ In the
Simad-Bhagavatam this is called a cheating religion, because the aim is
to know and love God but to gain some personal profit. In other
words, if I profess to follow some religion, but I do not know who God is
or how to love Him, I am practicing a cheating religion. As far as the
Chnstian religion is concerned, ample opportunity is given to understand
God, but no one is taking it. For example, the Bible contains the commandment ‘“Thou shall not kill,’’ but Christians have built the world’s
best slaughterhouses. How can they become God conscious if they disobey the commandments of Lord Jesus Christ? And this is going on not
past in the Christian religion, but in every religion. The title ‘“‘Hindu,”’
““Muslim,”’ or ‘‘Christian’’ is simply a rubber stamp. None of them
knows who God is and how to love Him.
Ms. Nixon: How can one tell a bona fide spiritual master from a fake?
Sila Prabhupada: Whoever teaches how to know God and how to love
Him—he is a spiritual master. Sometimes bogus rascals mislead people.
““I am God,”’ they claim, and people who do not know what God is
believe them. You must be a serious student to understand who God is
and how to love Him. Otherwise, you will simply waste your time. So the
difference between others and us is that we are the only movement that
can actually teach one how to know God and how to love Him. We are
presenting the science of how one can know Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by practicing the teachings of the Bhagavad-gita and
the Srimad-Bhdgavatam. They teach us that our only business is to love
 

12 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

God. Our business is not to ask God for our necessities. God gives
necessities to everyone—even to one who has no religion. For example,
cats and dogs have no religion, yet Krsna supplies them with the
necessities of life. So why should we bother Krsna for our daily bread?
He is already supplying it. Real religion means to learn how to love Him.
The Srimad-Bhdgavatam [1.2.6] says,

sa vai pumsam paro dharmo
yato bhaktir adhoksaje

ahaituky apratihata
yayatma suprasidati

First-class religion teaches one how to love God without any motive. If I
serve God for some profit, that is business—not love. Real love of God is
ahaituky apratihata: it cannot be checked by any material cause. It is unconditional. If one actually wants to love God, there is no impediment.
One can love Him whether one is poor or rich, young or old, black or
white.

Ms. Nixon: Do all paths lead to the same end?

Srila Prabhupada: No. There are four classes of men—the karmis, the
jndnis, the yogis, and the bhaktas—and each achieves a different goal.
The karmis work for some material profit. For example, in the city, many
- people work hard day and night, and their purpose is to get some money.
Thus, they are fruitive workers, or karmis. A jndniis a person who thinks,
‘Why am I working so hard? The birds, bees, elephants, and other creatures have no profession, yet they are also eating. So why should I unnecessarily work so hard? Rather, let me try to solve the problems of
life— birth, death, old age, and disease.’’ Jfdnis try to become immortal.
They think that if they merge into God’s existence, then they will
become immune to birth, death, old age, and disease. And yogis try to
acquire some mystic power to exhibit a wonderful show. For instance, a
yogi can become very small: if you put him into a locked room, he can
come out through any little space. By showing this kind of magic, the yogi
is immediately accepted as a very wonderful man. Of course, modern
yogis simply show some gymnastics—they have no real power. But a real
yogi has some power, which is not spiritual but material. So the yogi
wants mystic power, the jfidni wants salvation from the miseries of life,
and the karmi wants material profit. But the bhakta—the devotee—
doesn’t want anything for himself. He simply wants to serve God out of
love, just as a mother serves her child. There is no question of profit in a
Learning the Science of the Soul 13

mother’s service to her child. Out of pure affection and love, she cares
for him.

When you come to this stage of loving God, that is perfection. Neither
the karmi, the jfdni, nor the yogi can know God—only the bhakta. As
Krsna says in the Bhagavad-gita [18.55], bhaktya mam abhijanati: ‘‘Only
through the process of bhakti can one understand God.’’ Krsna never
says one can understand Him by other processes. No. Only through
bhakti. If you are interested in knowing God and loving Him, then you
must accept the devotional process. No other process will help you.
Ms. Nixon: What transformation does one undergo on the path...
Srila Prabhupada: No transformation—your original consciousness is
Krsna consciousness. Now your consciousness is covered with so much
rubbish. You have to cleanse it, and then—Krsna consciousness. Our
consciousness is like water. Water is by nature clear and transparent, but
sometimes it becomes muddy. If you filter all the mud out of the water, it
again comes to its original clear, transparent state.

Ms. Nixon: Can one function better in society by becoming Krsna
conscious?

Ssila Prabhupada: Yes, you can see that my disciples are not drunkards
or meat-eaters, and from a physiological point of view they are very
clean —they’ll never be attacked by serious diseases. Actually, giving up
meat eating is not a question of Krsna consciousness, but of civilized
human life. God has given human society so many things to eat—nice
fruits, vegetables, grain, and first-class milk. From milk one can prepare
hundreds of nutritious foods, but no one knows the art. Instead, people
maintain big slaughterhouses and eat meat. They are not even civilized.
When man is uncivilized, he kills poor animals and eats them.

Civilized men know the art of preparing nutritious foods from milk.
For instance, on our New Vrndavana farm in West Virginia, we make
hundreds of first-class preparations from milk. Whenever visitors come,
they are astonished that from milk such nice foods can be prepared. The
blood of the cow is very nutritious, but civilized men utilize it in the form
of milk. Milk is nothing but cow’s blood transformed. You can make milk
into so many things—yogurt, curd, ghee (clarified butter), and so on—
and by combining these milk products with grains, fruits, and vegetables,
you can make hundreds of preparations. This is civilized life—not
directly killing an animal and eating its flesh. The innocent cow is simply
ealing grass given by God and supplying milk, which you can live on. Do
you think cutting the cow’s throat and eating its flesh is civilized?

Ms. Nixon: No, I agree with you one hundred percent... . One thing I’m
14 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

very curious about: can the Vedas be taken symbolically as well as
literally?

Srila Prabhupada: No. They must be taken as they are, not symbolically.
That is why we are presenting the Bhagavad-gita As It Is.

Ms. Nixon: Are you attempting to revive the ancient Indian caste
system in the West? The Gitd mentions the caste system...

Srila Prabhupada: Where does the Bhagavad-gita mention the caste
system? Krsna says, cdtur-varnyam maya srstam guna-karma-vibhagasah:
‘I created four divisions of men according to their quality and work.”’
[Bg. 4.13] For instance, you can understand that there are engineers as
well as medical practitioners in society. Do you say they belong to
different castes—that one is in the engineer caste and the other is in the
medical caste? No. If a man has qualified himself in medical school, you
accept him as a doctor; and if another man has a degree in engineering,
you accept him as an engineer. Similarly, the Bhagavad-gita defines four
classes of men in society: a class of highly intelligent men, a class of administrators, a class of productive men, and ordinary workers. These
divisions are natural. For example, one class of men is very intelligent.
But to actually meet the qualifications of first-class men as described in
the Bhagavad-gita, they need to be trained, just as an intelligent boy requires training in a college to become a qualified doctor. So in the Krsna
consciousness movement we are training the intelligent men how to control their minds, how to control their senses, how to become truthful,
how to become clean internally and externally, how to become wise, how
to apply their knowledge in practical life, and how to become God conscious. All these boys [gestures toward seated disciples] have first-class
intelligence, and now we are training them to use it properly.

We are not introducing the caste system, in which any rascal born in a
brahmana family is automatically a bradhmana. He may have the habits of
a fifth-class man, but he is accepted as first class because of his birth in a
brahmana family. We don’t accept that. We recognize a man as first class
who is trained as a brdhmana. It doesn’t matter whether he is Indian,
European, or American; lowborn or highborn—it doesn’t matter. Any
intelligent man can be trained to adopt first-class habits. We want to stop
the nonsensical idea that we are imposing the Indian caste system on our
disciples. We are simply picking out men with first-class intelligence and
training them how to become first class in every respect.

Ms. Nixon: How do you feel about women’s liberation?
Srila Prabhupada: So-called equal rights for women means that the men
cheat the women. Suppose a woman and a man meet, they become
Learning the Science of the Soul 15

lovers, they have sex, the woman becomes pregnant, and the man goes
away. The woman has to take charge of the child and beg alms from the
government, or else she kills the child by having an abortion. This is the
woman’s independence. In India, although a woman may be povertystricken, she stays under the care of her husband, and he takes responsibility for her. When she becomes pregnant, she is not forced to kill the
child or maintain him by begging. So, which is real independence—to remain under the care of the husband or to be enjoyed by everyone?
Ms. Nixon: How about in spiritual life—can women also succeed in
Krsna consciousness?

Srila Prabhupada: We make no distinction on the basis of sex. We give
Krsna consciousness to both men and women equally. We welcome
women, men, the poor, the rich—everyone. Krsna says in the Bhagavadgita [5.18]:

vidya-vinaya-sampanne
brahmane gavi hastini

suni caiva svapake ca
panditah sama-darsinah

“*The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a
learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog, and a dogeater.” |

Ms. Nixon: Could you explain the meaning of the Hare Krsna mantra?
Srila Prabhupada: It is very simple. Hare means, ‘““O energy of the
Lord,’’ and Krsna means, ‘‘O Lord Krsna.”’ Just as there are males and
females in the material world, similarly, God is the original male
(gurusa), and His energy (prakrti) is the original female. So, when we
chant Hare Krsna, we are saying, ‘‘O Lord Krsna, O energy of Krsna,
kindly engage me in Your service.”’

Ms. Nixon: Could you please tell me a little bit about your life and how
you knew that you were the spiritual master of the Krsna consciousness
movement?

Srila Prabhupada: My life is simple. I was a householder with a wife and’
children— now I have grandsons—when my spiritual master ordered me
to go to the Western countries and preach the cult of Krsna consciousness. So I left everything on the order of my spiritual master, and now I
am trying to execute his order and the orders of Krsna.

Ms. Nixon: How old were you when he told you to go to the West?
Srila Prabhupada: At our first meeting, he ordered me to preach Krsna
16 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

consciousness in the West. I was then twenty-five years old, a married
man with two children. I tried my best to carry out his orders and started
managing Back to Godhead magazine in 1944, when I was still in household life. I started writing books in 1959 after retiring from family life,
and in 1965 I came to the United States.

Ms. Nixon: You have said that you are not God, and yet it appears to me,
as an outsider, that your devotees treat you as if you were God.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that is their duty. Because the spiritual master is
executing God’s order, he should be respected as much as God, just as a
government officer should be respected as much as the government
because he executes the government’s order. Even if an ordinary policeman comes, you have to respect him because he is a government man.
But that does not mean he isthe government. Sadksad-dharitvena samastasastrairl uktas tatha bhadvyata eva sadbhih: ‘‘The spiritual master is to be
honored as much as the Supreme Lord because he is the most confidential servitor of the Lord. This is acknowledged in all revealed scriptures
and followed by all authorities.”’

Ms. Nixon: I also wonder about the many beautiful material things that
the devotees bring you. For instance, you left the airport in a beautiful,
fancy car. I wonder about this because...

Srila Prabhupada: That teaches the disciples how to regard the spiritual
master as good as God. If you respect the government representative as
much as you respect the government, then you must treat him opulently.
If you respect the spiritual master as much as God, then you must offer
him the same facilities you would offer to God. God travels in a golden
car. If the disciples offer the spiritual master an ordinary motorcar, it
would not be sufficient because the spiritual master has to be treated like
God. If God comes to your home, will you bring him an ordinary motorcar—or will you arrange for a golden car?

Ms. Nixon: One of the most difficult aspects of Krsna consciousness for
an outsider to accept is the Deity in the temple—how it represents Krsna.
Could you talk a little bit about that?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. At the present moment, because you have not
been trained to see Krsna, He kindly appears before you so you can see
Him. You can see wood and stone, but you cannot see what is spiritual.
Suppose your father is in the hospital, and he dies. You are crying by his
bedside, ‘‘Now my father is gone!’’ But why do you say he is gone? What
is that thing which is gone?

Ms. Nixon: Well, his spirit is gone.

Srila Prabhupada: And have you seen that spirit?
Learning the Science of the Soul 17

Ms. Nixon: No.

Srila Prabhupada: So you cannot see spirit, and God is the Supreme
Spirit. Actually, He is everything—spirit and matter— but you cannot see
Him in His spiritual identity. Therefore, to show kindness toward you,
He appears out of His unbounded mercy in the form of a wooden or stone
Deity so that you can see Him.

Ms. Nixon: Thank you very much.

Srila Prabhupada: Hare Krsna!
“Real Advancement
Means Knowing God’’

“The purpose of this Krsna consciousness movement is to propagate God's
name, God’s glories, God's activities, God’s beauty, and God's love... . This
Krsna consciousness movement is meant to give perfect knowledge to human
society.”

Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you very much for kindly participating
in this Krsna consciousness movement. When this society was registered
in 1966 in New York, a friend suggested that it be named the Society for
God Consciousness. He thought that the name Krsna was sectarian. The
dictionary also says that Krsna is a Hindu god’s name. But in actuality, if
any name can be attributed to God, it is ‘“‘Krsna.”’

Actually God has no particular name. By saying He has no name, we
mean that no one knows how many names He has. Since God is
unlimited, His names also must be unlimited. Therefore we cannot settle
on one name. For instance, Krsna is sometimes called YaSoda-nandana,
the son of mother Yasoda; or Devaki-nandana, the son of Devaki; or
Vasudeva-nandana, the son of Vasudeva; or Nanda-nandana, the son of
Nanda. Sometimes He is called Partha-sdrathi, indicating that He acted as
the charioteer of Arjuna, who is sometimes called Partha, the son of
Prtha.

God has many dealings with His many devotees, and according to
those dealings, He is called certain names. Since He has innumerable
devotees and innumerable relations with them, He also has innumerable
names. We cannot hit on any one name. But the name Krsna means “‘allattractive.’’ God attracts everyone; that is the definition of ‘‘God.’’ We
have seen many pictures of Krsna, and we see that He attracts the cows,
calves, birds, beasts, trees, plants, and even the water in Vrndavana. He
is attractive to the cowherd boys, to the gopis, to Nanda Maharaja, to the
Pandavas, and to all human society. Therefore if any particular name can
be given to God, that name is “‘Krsna.”’

18
Learning the Science of the Soul 19

Parasara Muni, a great sage and the father of Vyasadeva, who compiled
all the Vedic literatures, gave the following definition of God:

aiSvaryasya samagrasya
viryasya yasasah Sriyah
jnana-vairdgyayos caiva
sannam bhaga itingana
[Visnu Purdna 6.5.47]

Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is thus defined by
Parasara Muni as one who is full in six opulences— who has full strength,
fame, wealth, knowledge, beauty, and renunciation.

Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the proprietor of all
riches. There are many rich men in the world, but no one can claim that
he possesses all the wealth. Nor can anyone claim that no one is richer
than he. We understand from the Srimad-Bhdgavatam, however, that
when Krsna was present on this earth He had 16,108 wives, and each
wife lived in a palace made of marble and bedecked with jewels. The
rooms were filled with furniture made of ivory and gold, and there was
great opulence everywhere. These descriptions are all given vividly in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam. In the history of human society we cannot find anyone who had sixteen thousand wives or sixteen thousand palaces. Nor
did Krsna go to one wife one day and another wife another day. No, He
was personally present in every palace at the same time. This means that
He expanded Himself in 16,108 forms. This is impossible for an ordinary
man, but it is not very difficult for God. If God is unlimited, He can expand Himself in unlimited forms, otherwise there is no meaning to the
word ‘‘unlimited.’’ God is omnipotent; He can maintain not only sixteen
thousand wives but sixteen million and still encounter no difficulty,
otherwise there is no meaning to the word ‘‘omnipotent.”’

These are all attractive features. We experience in this material world
that if a man is very rich, he is attractive. In America, for instance,
Rockefeller and Ford are very attractive because of their riches. They are
attractive even though they do not possess all the wealth of the world.
How much more attractive, then, is God, who is the possessor of all
riches.

Similarly, Krsna has unlimited strength. His strength was present from
the moment of His birth. When Krsna was only three months old, the
Putana demon attempted to kill Him, but instead she was killed by
Krsna. That is God. God is God from the beginning. He does not become
20 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

God by some meditation or mystic power. Krsna is not that type of God.
Krsna was God from the very beginning of His appearance.

Krsna also has unlimited fame. Of course, we are devotees of Krsna
and know of Him and glorify Him, but apart from us, many millions in
the world are aware of the fame of the Bhagavad-gitd. In all countries all
over the world the Bhagavad-gita is read by philosophers, psychologists,
and religionists. We are also finding very good sales with our Bhagavadgita As It Is. This is because the commodity is pure gold. There are many
editions of the Bhagavad-gita, but they are not pure. Ours is selling more
because we are presenting the Bhagavad-gitda as it is. The fame of the
Bhagavad-gita is Krsna’s fame.

Beauty, another opulence, is possessed unlimitedly by Krsna. Krsna
Himself is very beautiful, as are all His associates. Those who were pious
in a previous life receive an opportunity in this material world to take
birth in good families and good nations. The American people are very
rich and beautiful, and these opulences are a result of pious activities. All
over the world people are attracted to the Americans because they are advanced in scientific knowledge, riches, beauty, and so on. This planet is
an insignificant planet within the universe, yet within this planet, one
country — America—has so many attractive features. We can just imagine, then, how many attractive features must be possessed by God, who
is the creator of the entire cosmic manifestation. How beautiful He must
be— He who has created all beauty.

A person is attractive not only because of his beauty, but also because
of his knowledge. A scientist or philosopher may be attractive because of
his knowledge, but what knowledge is more sublime than that given by
Krsna in the Bhagavad-gita? There is no comparison in the world to such
knowledge. At the same time, Krsna possesses full renunciation
(vairdgya). So many things are working under Krsna’s direction in this
material world, but actually Krsna is not present here. A big factory may
continue to work, although the owner may not be present. Similarly,
Krsna’s potencies are working under the direction of His assistants, the
demigods. Thus Krsna Himself is aloof from the material world. This is
all described in the revealed scriptures.

God, therefore, has many names according to His activities, but
because He possesses so many opulences and because with these
opulences He attracts everyone, He is called Krsna. The Vedic literature
asserts that God has many names, but ‘“‘Krsna’’ is the principal name.

The purpose of this Krsna consciousness movement is to propagate
God’s name, God’s glories, God’s activities, God’s beauty, and God’s

 
Learning the Science of the Soul 21

love. There are many things within this material world, and all of them
are within Krsna. The most prominent feature of this material world is
sex, and that also is present in Krsna. We are worshiping Radha and
Krsna, and attraction exists between them, but material attraction and
spiritual attraction are not the same. In Krsna, sex is real, but here in the
material world it is unreal. Everything we deal with here is present in the
spiritual world, but here it has no real value. It is only a reflection. In
store windows we see many mannequins, but no one cares about them
because everyone knows they are false. A mannequin may be very
beautiful, but still it is false. When people see a beautiful woman,
however, they are attracted because they think she is real. In actuality,
the so-called living are also dead because this body is simply a lump of
matter; as soon as the soul leaves the body, no one would care to see the
so-called beautiful body of the woman. The real factor, the real attracting
force, is the spiritual soul.

In the material world everything is made of dead matter; therefore it is
simply an imitation. The reality of things exists in the spiritual world.
Those who have read the Bhagavad-gitad can understand what the spiritual
world is like, for there it is described:

paras tasmat tu bhavo ‘nyo
‘vyakto ’vyaktat sanatanah

yah sa sarvesu bhutesu
nasyatsu na vinasyati

“Yet there is another nature, which is eternal and is transcendental to
this manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is never annihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that part remains as it is.’

( Bhagavad-gita 8.20]

Scientists are attempting to calculate the length and breadth of this
material world, but they cannot begin. It will take them thousands of
years simply to travel to the nearest star. And what to speak of the
spiritual world? Since we cannot know the material world, how can we
know what is beyond it? The point is that we must know from authoritative sources.

The most authoritative source is Krsna, for He is the reservoir of all
knowledge. No one is wiser or more knowledgeable than Krsna. Krsna
informs us that beyond this material world is a spiritual sky, which is
filled with innumerable planets. That sky is far, far greater than material
space, which constitutes only one fourth of the entire creation. Similarly,
22 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

the living entities within the material world are but a small portion of the
living entities throughout the creation. This material world is compared
to a prison, and just as prisoners represent only a small percentage of the
total population, so the living entities within the material world constitute but a fragmental portion of all living entities.

Those who have revolted against God—who are criminal—are placed
in this material world. Sometimes criminals say that they don’t care for
the government, but nonetheless they are arrested and punished.
Similarly, living entities who declare their defiance of God are placed in
the material world.

Originally the living entities are all part and parcel of God and are related to Him just as sons are related to their father. Christians also consider God the supreme father. Christians go to church and pray, ‘‘Our
Father, who art in heaven.’’ The conception of God as father is also in
the Bhagavad-gita (14.4):

sarva-yonisu kaunteya
murtayah sambhavanti yah

tasam brahma mahad yonir
aham bija-pradah pita

‘‘It should be understood that all the species of life, O son of Kunti, are
made possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seedgiving father.”’

There are 8,400,000 species of life—including aquatics, plants, birds,
beasts, insects, and human beings. Of the human species, most are uncivilized, and out of the few civilized species only a small number of
human beings take to religious life. Out of many so-called religionists,
most identify themselves by designations, claiming, ‘‘I am Hindu,”’ ‘‘l
am Muslim,’ ‘“‘I am Christian,’’ and so on. Some engage in philanthropic work, some give to the poor, and open schools and hospitals. This
altruistic process is called karma-kdnda. Out of millions of these karmakdandis, there may be one jfdni (‘Sone who knows’’). Out of millions of
jndnis, one may be liberated, and out of billions of liberated souls, one
may be able to understand Krsna. This, then, is the position of Krsna. As
Krsna Himself says in the Bhagavad-gita [7.3]:

manusyanam sahasresu
kascid yatati siddhaye

yatatam api siddhanam
kascin mam vetti tattvatah

 
Learning the Science of the Soul 23

‘‘Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection,
and of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in
truth.”’

Understanding Krsna, then, is very difficult. But although the understanding of God is a difficult subject, God explains Himself in the
Bhagavad-gita. He says, ““I am like this, and I am like this. The material
nature is like this, and the spiritual nature is like that. The living entities
are like this, and the Supreme Soul is like that.’’ Thus everything is completely described in the Bhagavad-gita. Although understanding God is
very difficult, it is not difficult when God Himself gives us His own
knowledge. Actually that is the only process by which we can understand
God. To understand God by our own speculation is not possible, for God
is unlimited, and we are limited. Our knowledge and perception are both
very limited, so how can we understand the unlimited? If we simply accept the version of the unlimited, we can come to understand Him. That
understanding is our perfection.

Speculative knowledge of God will lead us nowhere. If a boy wants to
know who his father is, the simple process is to ask his mother. The
mother will then say, ‘‘This is your father.’’ This is the way of perfect
knowledge. Of course, one may speculate about one’s father, wondering
if this is the man or if that is the man, and one may wander over the
whole city, asking, ‘‘Are you my father? Are you my father?’’ The
knowledge derived from such a process, however, will always remain imperfect. One will never find his father in this way. The simple process is to
take the knowledge from an authority—in this case, the mother. She
Simply says, ‘‘My dear boy, here is your father.’’ In this way our
knowledge is perfect. Transcendental knowledge is similar. I was just previously speaking of a spiritual world. This spiritual world is not subject to
our speculation. God says, ‘‘There is a spiritual world, and that is My —
headquarters.’’ In this way we receive knowledge from Krsna, the best
authority. We may not be perfect, but our knowledge is perfect because it
is received from the perfect source.

The Krsna consciousness movement is meant to give perfect knowledge to human society. By such knowledge one can understand who he
is, who God is, what the material world is, why we have come here,
why we must undergo so much tribulation and misery, and why we
have to die. Of course, no one wants to die, but death will come. No one
wants to become an old man, but still old age comes. No one wants to
suffer from disease, but surely enough disease comes. These are the real
problems of human life, and they are yet to be solved. Civilization
24 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

attempts to improve eating, sleeping, mating, and defense, but these are
not the real problems. A man sleeps, and a dog sleeps. A man is not more
advanced simply because he has a nice apartment. In both cases, the
business is the same—sleeping. Man has discovered atomic weapons for
defense, but the dog also has teeth and claws and can also defend himself.
In both cases, defense is there. Man cannot say that because he has the
atomic bomb he can conquer the entire world or the entire universe.
That is not possible. Man may possess an elaborate method for defense,
or a gorgeous method for eating, sleeping, or mating, but that does not
make him advanced. We may call his advancement polished animalism,
and that ts all.

Real advancement means knowing God. If we are lacking knowledge
of God, we are not actually advanced. Many rascals deny the existence of
God because if there is no God they can continue their sinful activities. It
may be very nice for them to think that there is no God, but God will not
die simply because we deny Him. God is there, and His administration is
there. By His orders the sun is rising, the moon is rising, the water flows,
and the ocean abides by the tide. Thus everything functions under His
order. Since everything is going on very nicely, how can one realistically
think that God is dead? If there is mismanagement, we may say that
there is no government, but if there is good management, how can we
say that there is no government? Just because people do not know God,
they say that God is dead, that there is no God, or that God has no form.
But we are firmly convinced that there is God and that Krsna is God.
Therefore we are worshiping Him. That is the process of Krsna consciousness. Try to understand it. Thank you very much.

 
Reincarnation and Beyond

Mike Robinson, an interviewer for London Broadcasting Company, inquires
about the science of the soul: Have we been here before? Will we be back
again, or... ? Srila Prabhupdada calls upon the age-old Vedic literatures for
some Striking answers.

Mike Robinson: Can you tell me what you believe— what the philosophy
of the Hare Krsna movement is?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Krsna consciousness is not a question of belief;
it is a science. The first step is to know the difference between a living
body and a dead body. What is the difference? The difference is that
when someone dies, the spirit soul, or the living force, leaves the body.
And therefore the body is called ‘‘dead.’’ So, there are two things: one,
this body; and the other, the living force within the body. We speak of
the living force within the body. That is the difference between the
science of Krsna consciousness, which is spiritual, and ordinary material
science. As such, in the beginning it is very, very difficult for an ordinary
man to appreciate our movement. One must first understand that he is a
soul, or something other than his body.

Mike Robinson: And when will we understand that?

Srila Prabhupada: You can understand at any moment, but it requires a
little intelligence. For example, as a child grows, he becomes a boy, the
boy becomes a young man, the young man becomes an adult, and the
adult becomes an old man. Throughout all this time, although his body is
changing from a child to an old man, he still feels himself to be the same
person, with the same identity. Just see: the body is changing, but the occupier of the body, the soul, is remaining the same. So we should
logically conclude that when our present body dies, we get another body.
This is called transmigration of the soul.

Mike Robinson: So when people die it is just the physical body that dies?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes. That is explained very elaborately in the

25
26 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Bhagavad-gita [2.20]: na jdyate mriyate va kadacin...na hanyate hanyamane sarire.
Mike Robinson: Do you often quote references?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes, we quote many references. Krsna consciousness
is a serious education, not an ordinary religion. [To a devotee:] Find that
verse in the Bhagavad-gitd.
Disciple:
na jayate mriyate va kadacin
nayam bhiutva bhavita va na bhtiyah
ajo nityah sasvato ‘yam purdno
na hanyate hanyamane Ssarire

**For the soul, there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once been,
does he ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undying,
and primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain.”’

Mike Robinson: Thank you very much for reading that. So can you explain to me just a bit more? If the soul is undying, does everybody’s soul
go to be with God when they die?

Srila Prabhupada: Not necessarily. If one is qualified—if he qualifies
himself in this life to go back home, back to Godhead—then he can go. If
he does not qualify himself, then he gets another material body. And
there are 8,400,000 different bodily forms. According to his desires and
karma, the laws of nature give him a suitable body. It is just like when a
man contracts some disease and then develops that disease. Is that
difficult to understand?

Mike Robinson: It’s very difficult to understand all of it.

Srila Prabhupada: Suppose somebody has contracted smallpox. So,
after seven days he develops the symptoms. What is that period called?

Mike Robinson: Incubation?

Srila Prabhupada: Incubation. So you cannot avoid it. If you have contracted some disease it will develop, by nature’s law. Similarly, during
this life you associate with various modes of material nature, and that association will decide what kind of body you are going to get in the next
life. That is strictly under the laws of nature. Everyone is controlled by
the laws of nature—they’re completely dependent —but out of ignorance
people think that they are free. They’re not free; they’re imagining that
they’re free, but they are completely under the laws of nature. So, your
next birth will be decided according to your activities—sinful or pious, as
the case may be.
P
b,
bo

 

Learning the Science of the Soul 27

Mike Robinson: Your Grace, could you go back over that just for a
minute? You said that nobody is free. Are you saying that if we live a
good life, we in some way determine a good future for ourselves?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Mike Robinson: So we are free to choose what we believe to be important? Religion is important, because if we believe in God and lead a good
life...

Srila Prabhupada: It is not a question of belief. Do not bring in this
question of belief. It is law. For instance, there is a government. You may
believe or not believe, but if you break the law, you’ll be punished by the
government. Similarly, whether you believe or don’t believe, there is a
God. If you don’t believe in God and you independently do whatever you
like, then you'll be punished by the laws of nature.

Mike Robinson: [ see. Does it matter what religion you believe? Would
it matter if one was a devotee of Krsna?

Srila Prabhupada: It is not a question of religion. It is a question of
science. You are a Spiritual being, but because you are materially conditioned, you are under the laws of material nature. So you may believe in
the Christian religion, and I may believe in the Hindu religion, but that
does not mean that you are going to become an old man and I am not.
We’re talking of the science of growing old. This is natural law. It is not
that because you are Christian you are becoming old or because I am
Hindu [I am not becoming old. Everyone is becoming old. So, similarly,
all the laws of nature are applicable to everyone. Whether you believe
this religion or that religion, it doesn’t matter.

Mike Robinson: So, you’re saying that there’s only one God controlling
all of us?

Srila Prabhupada: There’s one God, and one nature’s law, and we are
all under that nature’s law. We are controlled by the Supreme. So if we
think that we are free or that we can do anything we like, that is our
foolishness. |

Mike Robinson: I see. Can you explain to me what difference it makes,
being a member of the Hare Krsna movement?

Srila Prabhupada: The Hare Krsna movement is meant for those who
are serious about understanding this science. There’s no question of our
being some sectarian group. No. Anyone can join. Students in college can
be admitted. You may be a Christian, you may be a Hindu, you may be a
Muhammadan—it doesn’t matter. The Krsna consciousness movement
admits anyone who wants to understand the science of God.
28 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Mike Robinson: And what difference would it make to someone— being
taught how to be a Hare Krsna person?

Srila Prabhupada: His real education would begin. The first thing is to
understand that you are a spirit soul. And because you are a spirit soul,
you are changing your body. This is the ABC of spiritual understanding.
So, when your body is finished, annihilated, you are not finished. You get
another body, just as you may change your coat and shirt. If you come to
see me tomorrow wearing a different shirt and a different coat, does that
mean you are a different person? No. Similarly, each time you die you
change bodies, but you, the spirit soul within the body, remain the same.
This point has to be understood; then one can make further progress in
the science of Krsna consciousness.

Mike Robinson: I am beginning to understand, but what I’m finding
difficult is how this ties in with the large numbers of your people we see
handing out Hare Krsna literature on Oxford Street.

Srila Prabhupada: This literature is meant to convince people about the
need for spiritual life.

Mike Robinson: And you're really not concerned whether or not they
join the Hare Krsna movement?

Srila Prabhupada: It doesn’t matter. Our mission is to educate them.
People are in ignorance; they are living in a fool’s paradise, thinking that
when their body is finished, everything is finished. That is foolishness.

Mike Robinson: And you are basically just concerned to tell them that
there is a spiritual dimension to life?

Srila Prabhupada: Our first concern is to tell you that you are not this
body, that the body is your covering (your shirt and coat) and that within
the body you are living.

Mike Robinson: Yes, I think I’ve got that now. If we could go on from
there—you said that how you lived made a difference in your life after
death, that there are natural laws that determine your next life. How does
the process of transmigration work?

Srila Prabhupada: The process is very subtle. The spirit soul is invisible
to our material eyes. It is atomic in size. After the destruction of the gross
body, which is made up of the senses, blood, bone, fat, and so forth, the
subtle body of mind, intelligence, and ego goes on working. So at the
time of death this subtle body carries the small spirit soul to another
gross body. The process is just like air carrying a fragrance. Nobody can
see where this rose fragrance is coming from, but we know that it is being
carried by the air. You cannot see how, but it is being done. Similarly, the
process of transmigration of the soul is very subtle. According to the conLearning the Science of the Soul 29

dition of the mind at the time of death, the minute spirit soul enters into
the womb of a particular mother through the semen of a father, and then
the soul develops a particular type of body given by the mother. It may be
a human being, it may be a cat, a dog, or anything.

Mike Robinson: Are you saying that we were something else before this
life?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Mike Robinson: And we keep coming back as something else the next
time?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, because you are eternal. According to your
work, you are simply changing bodies. Therefore, you should want to
know how to stop this business, how you can remain in your original,
Spiritual body. That is Krsna consciousness.

Mike Robinson: I see. So if 1 become Krsna conscious, I wouldn’t risk
coming back as a dog?

Srila Prabhupada: No. [To a devotee:] Find this verse: janma karma ca
me divyam...

Disciple:

janma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatah

tyaktva deham punar janma
naiti mam eti so ‘rjuna

‘One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this
material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.’ [Bg. 4.9]
Srila Prabhupada: God is saying, ‘‘Anyone who understands Me is free
from birth and death.’’ But one cannot understand God by materialistic
speculation. That is not possible. One must first come to the spiritual
platform. Then he gets the intelligence required to understand God. And
when he understands God, he does not get any more material bodies. He
goes back home, back to Godhead. He lives eternally; no more change of
body.

Mike Robinson: I see. Now, you’ve read twice from your scriptures.
Where do these scriptures come from? Can you briefly explain that?
Srila Prabhupada: Our scriptures are coming from Vedic literature,
which has existed from the beginning of creation. Whenever there is
some new material creation—like this microphone, for instance—there is
also some literature explaining how to deal with it. Isn’t that so?
30 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Mike Robinson: Yes, that’s right, there is.

Srila Prabhupada: And that literature comes along with the creation of
the microphone.

Mike Robinson: That’s right, yes.

Srila Prabhupada: So, similarly, the Vedic literature comes along with
the cosmic creation, to explain how to deal with it.

Mike Robinson: I[ see. So, these scriptures have been in existence since
the beginning of creation. Now, if we could move on to something I
believe you feel very strongly about. What is the main difference between Krsna consciousness and the other Eastern disciplines being
taught in the West?

Srila Prabhupada: The difference is that we are following the original
literature, and they are manufacturing their own literature. That is the
difference. When there is some question on spiritual matters, you must
consult the original literature, not some literature issued by a bogus man.
Mike Robinson: What about the chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna...
Srila Prabhupada: Chanting Hare Krsna is the easiest process by which
to become purified, especially in this age, when people are so dull that
they cannot very easily understand spiritual knowledge. If one chants
Hare Krsna, then his intelligence becomes purified, and he can underStand spiritual things.

Mike Robinson: Can you tell me how you are guided in what you do?

Srila Prabhupada: We take guidance from the Vedic literature.

Mike Robinson: From the scriptures you quoted?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, it’s all in the literatures. We’re explaining them
in English. But we’re not manufacturing anything. If we were to
manufacture knowledge, then everything would be spoiled. The Vedic
literature is something like the literature that explains how to set up this
microphone. It says, ‘‘Do it like this: some of the screws should be on
this side, around the metal.’’ You cannot make any change; then everything would be spoiled. Similarly, because we are not manufacturing
anything, one simply has to read one of our books, and he receives real
spiritual knowledge.

Mike Robinson: How can the philosophy of Krsna consciousness affect
the way people live?

Srila Prabhupada: It can relieve people’s suffering. People are suffering
because they are misunderstanding themselves to be the body. If you
think that you are your coat and shirt, and you very carefully wash the
coat and shirt but you forget to eat, will you be happy?
Learning the Science of the Soul 31

Mike Robinson: No, I wouldn't.

Srila Prabhupada: Similarly, everyone is simply washing the ‘‘coat and
shirt’’ of the body, but forgetting about the soul within the body. They
have no information about what is within the ‘‘coat and shirt’’ of the
body. Ask anybody what he is, and he will say, ‘““Yes, I am an Englishman,” or ‘“‘I am an Indian.’’ And if we say, “‘I can see you have an
English or an Indian body, but what are you?’’—that he cannot say.
Mike Robinson: I see.

Srila Prabhupada: The whole modern civilization is operating on the
misunderstanding that the body is the self (dehdtma-buddhi). This is the
mentality of the cats and dogs. Suppose I try to enter England, and
you stop me at the border: ‘I am an Englishman,’’ you say, ‘“but you are
Indian. Why have you come here?’’ And the dog barks, ‘‘ Rau, rau, why
are you coming?’’ So what is the difference in mentality? The dog is
thinking he’s a dog and I’m a stranger, and you are thinking you are an
Englishman and I am an Indian. There’s no difference in mentality. So if
you keep people in the darkness of a dog’s mentality and declare that you
are advancing in civilization, you are most misguided.

Mike Robinson: Now, moving on to another point, I gather the Hare
Krsna movement has some concern for areas of the world where there is
suffering.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, we have the only concern. Others are simply
avoiding the main problems: birth, old age, disease, and death. Others
have no solutions to these problems; they are simply talking all kinds of
nonsense. People are being misguided. They are being kept in darkness.
Let us start to give them some light.

Mike Robinson: Yes, but apart from giving spiritual enlightenment, are
you also concerned for people’s physical well-being?

Srila Prabhupada: Physical well-being automatically follows spiritual
well-being.

Mike Robinson: And how does that work?

Srila Prabhupada: Suppose you have a car. So, naturally, you take care
of the car as well as yourself. But you don’t identify yourself as the car.
You don’t say, ‘“I am this car.’’ That is nonsense. But this is what people
are doing. They are taking too much care of the bodily ‘‘car,’’ thinking
that the car is the self. They forget that they are different from the car,
that they are a spirit soul and have a different business. Just as no one can
drink petrol and be satisfied, no one can be satisfied with bodily activities.
One must find out the proper food for the soul. If a man thinks, ‘‘I am a
32 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

car, and I must drink this petrol,’’ he is considered insane. Similarly, one
who thinks that he is this body, and who tries to become happy with
bodily pleasures, is also insane.

Mike Robinson: There’s a quote here that I’d like you to comment on. I
was given this literature by your people before I came, and one of the
things you say here is that ““Religion without a rational basis is just sentiment.’’ Can you explain that? ,
Srila Prabhupada: Most religious people say, ‘‘We believe...’ But
what is the value of this belief? You may believe something which is not
actually correct. For instance, some of the Christian people say, ‘‘We
believe that animals have no soul.’’ That is not correct. They believe
animals have no soul because they want to eat the animals, but actually
animals do have a soul.

Mike Robinson: How do you know that the animal has a soul?

Srila Prabhupada: You can know, also. Here is the scientific proof: the
animal eats, you eat; the animal sleeps, you sleep; the animal has sex,
you have sex; the animal also defends, you also defend. Then what is the
difference between you and the animal? How can you say that you have a
soul but the animal doesn’t?

Mike Robinson: I can see that completely. But the Christian scriptures
say...

Srila Prabhupada: Don’t bring in any scriptures; this is a commonsense
topic. Try to understand. The animal is eating, you are eating; the animal
is sleeping, you are sleeping; the animal is defending, you are defending;
the animal is having sex, you are having sex; the animals have children,
you have children; they have a living place, you have a living place. If the
animal’s body is cut, there is blood; if your body is cut, there is blood. So,
all these similarities are there. Now, why do you deny this one similarity,
the presence of the soul? This is not logical. You have studied logic? In
logic there is something called analogy. Analogy means drawing a conclusion by finding many points of similarity. If there are so many points of
similarity between human beings and animals, why deny one similarity?
That is not logic. That is not science.

Mike Robinson: But if you take that argument and use it the other
way...

Srila Prabhupada: There is no other way. If you are not arguing on the
basis of logic, then you are not rational.

Mike Robinson: Yes, OK, but let’s start from another hypothesis. Suppose we assume that a human being has no soul...
Learning the Science of the Soul 33

Srila Prabhupada: Then you must explain the difference between a living body and a dead body. I have already explained this at the beginning.
As soon as the living force, the soul, is gone from the body, even the
most beautiful body has no value. No one cares for it; it’s thrown away.
But now, if I touch your hair, there will be a fight. That is the distinction
between a living body and a dead body. In a living body the soul is there,
and in a dead body the soul is not there. As soon as the soul leaves the
body, the body has no value. It is useless. This is very simple to understand, but even the biggest so-called scientists and philosophers are too
dullheaded to understand it. Modern society is ina very abominable condition. There is no man with a real brain.

Mike Robinson: Are you referring to all the scientists who fail to understand the spiritual dimension in life?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Real science means full knowledge of everything, material and spiritual.

Mike Robinson: But you were a chemist in secular life, were you not?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, I was a chemist in my earlier life. But it doesn’t
require any great intelligence to become a chemist. Any commonsense
man can do it.

Mike Robinson: But presumably you think that material science is also
important, even if today’s scientists are dullheaded.

Srila Prabhupada: Material science is important just so far. It is not
all-important.

Mike Robinson: I see. Can I come back to a question I had from before?
When we were differing a few minutes ago you were saying, ‘“Don’t
bring the scriptures in; just use common sense.”’ But what part do the
scriptures play in your religion? How important are they?

Srila Prabhupada: Our religion is a science. When we say that a child
grows into a boy, it is science. It is not religion. Every child grows into a
boy. What is the question of religion? Every man dies. What is the question of religion? And when a man dies, the body becomes useless. What
is the question of religion? It is science. Whether you’re Christian or
Hindu or Muslim, when you die your body becomes useless. This is
science. When your relative dies, you cannot say, ““We are Christian; we
believe he has not died.’’ No, he has died. Whether you are Christian or
Hindu or Muslim he has died. So when we speak, we speak on this basis:
that the body is important only as long as the soul is in the body. When
the soul is not there, it is useless. This science is applicable to everyone,
and we are trying to educate people on this basis.
34 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Mike Robinson: But if I understand you correctly, you seem to be
educating people on a purely scientific basis. Where does religion come.
into it at all?

Srila Prabhupada: Religion also means science. People have wrongly
taken religion to mean faith—‘‘I believe.’’ [To a devotee:] Look up the
word religion in the dictionary.

Disciple: Under religion the dictionary says, ‘‘recognition of superhuman
control or power, and especially of a personal God entitled to obedience,
and effecting such recognition with the proper mental attitude.”’

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Religion means learning how to obey the
supreme controller. So, you may be Christian and I may be Hindu; it
doesn’t matter. We must both accept that there is a supreme controller.
Everyone has to accept that; that is real religion. Not this ‘““We believe
animals have no soul.’ That is not religion. That is most unscientific.
Religion means scientific understanding of the supreme controller: to
understand the supreme controller and obey Him—that’s all. In the
State, the good citizen is he who understands the government and obeys
the laws of the government, and the bad citizen is the one who doesn’t
care for the government. So, if you become a bad citizen by ignoring
God’s government, then you are irreligious. And if you are a good
citizen, then you are religious.

Mike Robinson: I see. Can you tell me what you believe to be the meaning of life? Why do we exist in the first place?

Srila Prabhupada: The meaning of life is to enjoy. But now you are ona
false platform of life, and therefore you are suffering instead of enjoying.
Everywhere we see the struggle for existence. Everyone is struggling, but
what is their enjoyment in the end? They are simply suffering and dying.
Therefore, although life means enjoyment, at the present moment your
life is not enjoyment. But if you come to the real, spiritual platform of
life, then you’ll enjoy.

Mike Robinson: Can you explain to me, finally, some of the stages you
go through in spiritual life? What are the spiritual stages a new devotee of
Krsna goes through?

Srila Prabhupada: The first stage is that you are inquisitive. ‘‘So,”’ you
say, ‘‘what is this Krsna consciousness movement? Let me study it.’’
This is called sraddhda, or faith. This is the beginning. Then, if you are
serious, you mix with those who are cultivating this knowledge. You try
to understand how they are feeling. Then you’ll feel, ‘“Why not become
one of them?’’ And when you become one of them, then all your misgivings soon go away. You become more faithful, and then you get a real
Learning the Science of the Soul 35

taste for Krsna consciousness. Why aren’t these boys going to see the
cinema? Why don’t they eat meat or go to the nightclub? Because their
taste has changed. They hate all these things now. In this way, you make
progress. First faith, then association with devotees, then removal of all
misgivings, then firm faith, then taste, then God realization, and then
love of God, the perfection. That is first-class religion. Not some
ritualistic ceremony of °‘I believe, you believe.’ That is not religion.
That is cheating. Real religion means to'develop your love for God. That
is the perfection of religion.

Mike Robinson: Thank you very much for talking with me. It’s been a
pleasure talking to you.

Srila Prabhupada: Hare Krsna.
Truth and Beauty

“Beauty is truth, truth beauty,” said Keats. “That is all ye know on earth, and
all ye need to know.” Or is it? In this charming yet cutting essay, which first
appeared in the old tabloid version of Back to Godhead (November 20,
1958), Srila Prabhupdda tells the unforgettable story of “liquid beauty.”

There may sometimes be arguments about whether ‘“‘truth’’ and
‘“beauty’’ are compatible terms. One would willingly agree to express the
truth, one might say, but since truth is not always beautiful—indeed, it is
frequently rather startling and unpleasant—how is one to express truth
and beauty at the same time?

In reply, we may inform all concerned that ‘“‘truth’’ and ‘“‘beauty’’ are
compatible terms. Indeed, we may emphatically assert that the actual
truth, which is absolute, is always beautiful. The truth is so beautiful that
it attracts everyone, including the truth itself. Truth is so beautiful that
many sages, saints, and devotees have left everything for the sake of
truth. Mahatma Gandhi, an idol of the modern world, dedicated his life
to experimenting with truth, and all his activities were aimed toward
truth only.

Why only Mahatma Gandhi? Every one of us has the urge to search for
truth alone, for the truth is not only beautiful but also all-powerful, allresourceful, all-famous, all-renounced, and all-knowledgeable.

Unfortunately, people have no information of the actual truth. Indeed,
99.9 percent of men in all walks of life are pursuing untruth only, in the
name of truth. We are actually attracted by the beauty of truth, but since
time immemorial we have been habituated to love of untruth appearing
like truth. Therefore, to the mundaner “‘truth’’ and “‘beauty’’ are incompatible terms. The mundane truth and beauty may be explained as
follows.

Once a man who was very powerful and strongly built but whose
character was very doubtful fell in love with a beautiful girl. The girl was

36
Learning the Science of the Soul 37

not only beautiful in appearance but also saintly in character, and as such
she did not like the man’s advances. The man, however, was insistent
because of his lustful desires, and therefore the girl requested him to wait
only seven days, and she set a time after that when he could meet her.
The man agreed, and with high expectations he began waiting for the
appointed time.

The saintly girl, however, in order to manifest the real beauty of absolute truth, adopted a method very instructive. She took very strong
doses of laxatives and purgatives, and for seven days she continually
passed loose stool and vomited all that she ate. Moreover, she stored all
the loose stool and vomit in suitable pots. As a result of the purgatives,
the so-called beautiful girl became lean and thin like a skeleton, her complexion turned blackish, and her beautiful eyes sank into the sockets of
her skull. Thus at the appointed hour she waited anxiously to receive the
eager man.

The man appeared on the scene well dressed and well behaved and
asked the ugly girl he found waiting there about the beautiful girl he was
to meet. The man could not recognize the girl he saw as the same
beautiful girl for whom he was asking; indeed, although she repeatedly
asserted her identity, because of her pitiable condition he was unable to
gexognize her.

At last the girl told the powerful man that she had separated the ingredents of her beauty and stored them in pots. She also told him that he
qpuld enjoy those juices of beauty. When the mundane poetic man asked
eo see these juices of beauty, he was directed to the store of loose stool
and liquid vomit, which were emanating an unbearably bad smell. Thus
the whole story of the beauty-liquid was disclosed to him. Finally, by the
gsace of the saintly girl, this man of low character was able to distinguish
@etween the shadow and the substance, and thus he came to his senses.

This man’s position was similar to the position of every one of us who
@ aftracted by false, material beauty. The girl mentioned above had a
Beautifully developed material body in accordance with the desires of her
gand, but in fact she was apart from that temporary material body and
mand. She was in fact a spiritual spark, and so also was the lover who was
aturacted by her false skin.

Mundane intellectuals and aesthetics, however, are deluded by the
outward beauty and attraction of the relative truth and are unaware of the
ggarnitual spark, which is both truth and beauty at the same time. The
gparitual spark is so beautiful that when it leaves the so-called beautiful
Body, which in fact is full of stool and vomit, no one wants to touch that
38 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

body, even if it is decorated with a costly costume.

We are all pursuing a false, relative truth, which is incompatible with
real beauty. The actual truth, however, is permanently beautiful, retaining the same standard of beauty for innumerable years. That spiritual
spark is indestructible. The beauty of the outer skin can be destroyed in
only a few hours merely by a dose of a strong purgative, but the beauty of
truth is indestructible and always the same. Unfortunately, mundane artists and intellectuals are ignorant of this beautiful spark of spirit. They
are also ignorant of the whole fire which is the source of these spiritual
sparks, and they are ignorant of the relationships between the sparks and
the fire, which take the form of transcendental pastimes. When those
pastimes are displayed here by the grace of the Almighty, foolish people
who cannot see beyond their senses confuse those pastimes of truth and
beauty with the manifestations of loose stool and vomit described above.
Thus in despair they ask how truth and beauty can be accommodated at
the same time.

Mundaners do not know that the whole spiritual entity is the beautiful
person who attracts everything. They are unaware that He is the prime
substance, the prime source, and fountainhead of everything that be.
The infinitesimal spiritual sparks, being parts and parcels of that whole
Spirit, are qualitatively the same in beauty and eternity. The only
difference is that the whole is eternally the whole and the parts are eternally the parts. Both of them, however, are the ultimate truth, ultimate
beauty, ultimate knowledge, ultimate energy, ultimate renunciation, and
ultimate opulence.

Although written by the greatest mundane poet or intellectual, any
literature which does not describe the ultimate truth and beauty is but a
store of loose stool and vomit of the relative truth. Real literature is that
which describes the ultimate truth and beauty of the Absolute.
Relevant Inquiries

Again in the old tabloid Back to Godhead, this time dated April 20, 1960,
Svila Prabhupdda talks about the science of the soul: “... since a human
being is a rational animal, he is born to make inquiries and questions. The
greater the number of questions, the greater the advancement of knowledge
and science. ... The most intelligent man, however, inquires about what happens after death....”

A small child walking with his father goes on inquiring constantly. He
asks his father so many odd things, and the father has to satisfy him with
proper answers. When I was a young father in my householder life, I was
overflooded with hundreds of questions from my second son, who was
my constant companion. One day it so happened that a bridegroom’s
party was passing our tramcar, and the four-year-old boy, as usual, inquired what the big procession was. He was given all possible answers to
his thousand and one questions regarding the marriage party, and finally
he asked whether his own father was married! This question gave rise to
loud laughter from all the elderly gentlemen present, although the boy
was perplexed as to why we were laughing. Anyway, the boy was somehow satisfied by his married father.

The lesson from this incident is that since a human being i is a rational
animal, he is born to make inquiries. The greater the number of questions, the greater the advancement of knowledge and science. The whole
of material civilization is based on this originally large volume of questions put by young men to their elders. When elderly persons give the
proper answers to the questions of the youngsters, civilization makes
progress, one step after another. The most intelligent man, however, inquires about what happens after death. The less intelligent make lesser
mquiries, but the questions of those who are more intelligent go higher
and still higher.

Among the most intelligent of men was Maharaja Pariksit, the great
king of the entire world, who was accidently cursed by a brdhmana to
meet death from the bite of a serpent within seven days. The bra@hmana

39
40 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

who cursed him was only a boy, yet he was very powerful, and because he
did not know the importance of the great king, the boy foolishly cursed
him to meet death within seven days. This was later lamented by the
boy’s father, whom the king had offended. When the king was informed
of the unfortunate curse, he at once left his palatial home and went to the
bank of the Ganges, which was near his capital, to prepare for his impending death. Because he was a great king, almost all the great sages and
learned scholars assembled at the place where the king was fasting prior
to leaving his mortal body. At last, Sukadeva Goswami, the youngest
contemporary saint, also arrived there, and he was unanimously accepted
to preside at that meeting, although his great father was also present. The
king respectfully offered Sukadeva Goswami the principal seat of esteem
and asked him relevant questions regarding his passing from the mortal
world, which was to take place on the seventh day thenceforward. The
great king, as a worthy descendant of the Pandavas, who were all great
devotees, placed the following relevant inquiries before the great sage
Sukadeva. ‘‘My dear sir, you are the greatest of the great transcendentalists, and therefore I submissively beg to ask you about my duties at
this moment. I am just on the verge of my death. Therefore, what should
I do at this critical hour? Please tell me, my lord—what should I hear,
what should I worship, or whom should I remember now? A great sage
like you does not stay at the home of a householder more than necessary,
and therefore it is my good fortune that you have kindly come here at the
time of my death. Please, therefore, give me your directions at this
critical hour.”’

The great sage, having thus been pleasingly requested by the king,
answered his questions authoritatively, for the sage was a great transcendental scholar and was also well equipped with godly qualities, since he
was the worthy son of Badardyana, or Vyasadeva, the original compiler of
the Vedic literature.

Sukadeva Goswami said, ‘‘My dear king, your inquiry is very much
relevant, and it is also beneficial for all people of all times. Such inquiries,
which are the highest of all, are relevant because they are confirmed by
the teachings of the veddnta-darsana, the conclusion of the Vedic
Knowledge, and are atmavit-sammatah; in other words, liberated souls,
who have full knowledge of their spiritual identity, put forward such
relevant inquiries in order to elucidate further information about the
Transcendence.”’

The Srimad-Bhdgavatam is the natural commentary upon the great VeLearning the Science of the Soul 41

danta (or Sariraka) stitras, which were compiled by Srila Vyasadeva. The
Vedanta-stitras are the topmost Vedic literature, and they contain the
nucleus of basic inquiries about the transcendental subject of spiritual
knowledge. Yet although Srila Vyasadeva compiled this great treatise, his
mind was not satisfied. Then he happened to meet Sri Narada, his spiritual master, who advised him to describe the identity of the Personality
of Godhead. Upon receiving this advice, Vyasadeva meditated on the
principle of bhakti-yoga, which showed him distinctly what is the Absolute and what is the relativity, or maya. Having achieved perfect
realization of these facts, he compiled the great narration of the SrimadBhagavatam, or beautiful Bhagavatam, which begins with actual historical
facts concerning the life of Maharaja Pariksit.

The Vedanta-siitra begins with the key inquiry about the Transcendence, athdato brahma-jijndsa: ‘One should now inquire about Brahman,
or the Transcendence.”’

As long as a man is in the full vigor of life, he forgets the naked truth of
death, which he has to meet. Thus a foolish man makes no relevant inquiry about the real problems of life. Everyone thinks that he will never
die, although he sees evidence of death before his eyes at every second.
Here is the distinction between animalism and humanity. An animal like
a goat has no sense of its impending death. Although its brother goat is
being slaughtered, the goat, being allured by the green grass offered to it,
will stand peacefully waiting to be slaughtered next. On the other hand, if
a human being sees his fellow man being killed by an enemy, he either
fights to save his brother or leaves, if possible, to save his own life. That
is the difference between a man and a goat.

An intelligent man knows that death is born along with his own birth.
He knows that he is dying at every second and that the final touch will be
given as soon as his term of life is finished. He therefore prepares himself
for the next life or for liberation from the disease of repeated birth and
death.

A foolish man, however, does not know that this human form of life is
obtained after a series of births and deaths imposed in the past by the
laws of nature. He does not know that a living entity is an eternal being,
who has no birth and death. Birth, death, old age, and disease are external impositions on a living entity and are due to his contact with material
nature and to his forgetfulness of his eternal, godly nature and qualitative
oneness with the Absolute Whole.

Human life provides the opportunity to know this eternal fact, or truth.
 

42 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Thus the very beginning of the Veddnta-stitra advises that because we
have this valuable form of human life, it is our duty—now—to inquire,
What is Brahman, the Absolute Truth?

A man who is not intelligent enough does not inquire about this transcendental life; instead, he inquires about many irrelevant matters which
do not concern his eternal existence. From the very beginning of his life,
he inquires from his mother, father, teachers, professors, books, and so
many other sources, but he does not have the right type of information
about his real life.

As mentioned before, Pariksit Maharaja was given a warning notice
that he would meet death within seven days, and he at once left his palace
to prepare himself for the next stage. The king had at least seven days at
his disposal in which to prepare for death, but as far as we are concerned,
although at least we know that our death is sure, we have no information
of the date fixed for the occurrence. I do not know whether I am going to
meet death at the next moment. Even such a great man as Mahatma
Gandhi could not calculate that he was going to meet with death in the
next five minutes, nor could his great associates guess his impending
death. Nonetheless, all such gentlemen present themselves as great
leaders of the people.

It is ignorance of death and life that distinguishes an animal from a
man. A man, in the real sense of the term, inquires about himself and
what he is. Wherefrom has he come into this life, and where is he going
after death? Why is he put under the troubles of threefold miseries
although he does not want them? Beginning from one’s childhood, one
goes on inquiring about so many things in his life, but he never inquires
about the real essence of life. This is animalism. There is no difference
between a man and an animal as far as the four principles of animal life
are concerned, for every living being exists by eating, sleeping, fearing,
and mating. But only the human life is meant for relevant inquiries into
the facts about eternal life and the Transcendence. Human life is
therefore meant for research into eternal life, and the Vedanta-sutra advises one to conduct this research now or never. If one fails to inquire
now into these relevant matters about life, one is sure to go back again to
the animal kingdom by the laws of nature. Therefore, even if a foolish
man appears advanced in material science—that is, in eating, sleeping,
fearing, mating, and so on—he cannot get free from the cruel hands of
death by the law of nature. The law of nature works under three modes—
goodness, passion, and ignorance. Those who live under conditions of
goodness are promoted to the higher, spiritual status of life, and those
Learning the Science of the Soul 43

who live under conditions of passion remain stationed in the same place
in the material world where they are now, but those who live under conditions of ignorance are sure to be degraded to the lower species.

The modern setup of human civilization is a risky one because it offers
no education about relevant inquiries into the essential principles of life.
Like animals, people do not know that they are going to be slaughtered
by the laws of nature. They are satisfied with a bunch of green grass, or a
so-called jolly life, like the waiting goat in a slaughterhouse. Considering
such a condition of human life, we are just trying to make a humble at- tempt to save the human being by the message of Back to Godhead. This
method is not fictitious. If there is at all to be an era of reality, this
message of Back to Godhead is the beginning of that era.

According to Sri Sukadeva Goswami, the real fact is that a grhamedhi,
or a person who has tied himself, like the goat meant for slaughter, in the
business of family, society, community, nation, or humanity at large in
regard to the problems and necessities of animal life—namely eating,
sleeping, fearing, and mating—and who has no knowledge of the Transcendence is no better than an animal. He may have inquired about
physical, political, economic, cultural, educational, or similar other matters of temporary, material concern, but if he has not inquired about the
principles of transcendental life, he should be regarded as a blind man
driven ahead by uncontrolled senses and about to fall into a ditch. That is
the description of the grhamedhi.

The opposite of the grha-medhi, however, is the grha-stha. The
grhastha-ashram, or the shelter of spiritual family life, is as good as the
life of a sannydsi, a member of the renounced order. Regardless of
whether one is a householder or a renunciant, the important point ts that
of relevant inquiries. A sannyasi is bogus if not interested in relevant inquiries, and a grhastha, or householder, is bona fide if he is inclined to
put forward such inquiries. The grhamedhi, however, is simply interested
im the animal necessities of life. By the laws of nature, the grhamedhi’s
life is full of calamities, whereas the life of the grhastha is full of happiness. But in the modern human civilization, the grhamedhis are posing as
the grhasthas. We should therefore know who is what. A grhamedhi’s life
ts full of vices because he does not know how to live a family life. He does
not know that beyond his control is a power who supervises and controls
his activities, and he has no conception of his future life. The grhamedhi
is blind to his future and has no aptitude for making relevant inquiries.
His only qualification is that he is bound by the shackles of attachment to
the false things he has contacted in his temporary existence.
44 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

At night such grhamedhis waste their valuable time by sleeping or by
satisfying their different varieties of sexual urges by visiting cinema
shows and attending clubs and gambling houses, where women and liquor are indulged in lavishly. And during the day, they waste their valuable life in accumulating money or, if they have sufficient money to
spend, by adjusting the comforts of their family members. Their standard
of living and their personal needs increase with their increase in monetary income. Thus there is no limit to their expenses, and they are never
satiated. Consequently there is unlimited competition in the field of
economic development, and therefore there is no peace in any society of
the human world. .

Everyone is perplexed by the same questions about earning and spending, but ultimately one must depend on the mercy of mother nature.
When there is a scarcity in production or there are disturbances caused by
providence, the poor planmaking politician blames it on cruel nature but
carefully avoids studying how and by whom the laws of nature are controlled. The Bhagavad-gita, however, explains that the laws of nature are
controlled by the Absolute Personality of Godhead. God alone is the
controller of nature and the natural laws. Ambitious materialists sometimes examine a fragment of the law of nature, but they never care to
know the maker of these laws. Most of them do not believe in the existence of an absolute person or God who controls the laws of nature.
Rather, they simply concern themselves with the principles by which
different elements interact, but they make no reference to the ultimate
direction which makes such interactions possible. They have no relevant
questions or answers in this regard. The second of the Veddnta-siitras,
however, answers the essential question about Brahman by asserting that
the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Transcendence, is He from whom
everything is generated. Ultimately, He is the Supreme Person.

Not only is the foolish grhamedhi ignorant of the temporary nature of
the particular type of body he has obtained, but he is also blind to the actual nature of what is happening before him in the daily affairs of his life.
He may see his father die, his mother die, or a relative or neighbor die,
yet he does not make the relevant inquiries about whether or not the
other existing members of his family will die. Sometimes he thinks and
knows that all the members of his family will die today or tomorrow and
that he also will die. He may know that the whole family show—or, for
that matter, the whole show of community, society, nation, and all such
things—is but a temporary bubble in the air, having no permanent value.
Yet he is mad after such temporary arrangements and does not concern
Learning the Science of the Soul 45

himself with any relevant inquiries. He has no knowledge as to where he
has to go after his death. He works very hard for the temporary arrangements of his family, society, or nation, but he never makes any future arrangement either for himself or for others who will pass away from this
present phase of life.

In a public vehicle like a railway carriage, we meet and sit down
together with some unknown friends and become members of the same
vehicle for a short time, but in due course we separate, never to meet
again. Similarly, in a long sojourn of life, we get a temporary sitting accommodation in a so-called family, country, or society, but when the
time is up, we are unwillingly separated from one another, never to meet
again. There are so many questions relevant to our temporary arrangements in life and our friends in these temporary arrangements, but a man
who is a grhamedhi never inquires about things of a permanent nature.
Weare all busy making permanent plans in various degrees of leadership,
without knowing the permanent nature of things as they are. Sripada
Sankaracarya, who especially strove to remove this ignorance in society
and who advocated the cult of spiritual knowledge in regard to the allpervading impersonal Brahman, said in despair, ‘“Children are engaged
in playing, young boys are engaged in so-called love affairs with young
girls, and the old are seriously thoughtful about adjusting a baffled life of
struggle. But, alas, no one is prepared to inquire relevantly into the
science of Brahman, the Absolute Truth.”’

Sri Sukadeva Goswami, who was asked for direction by Maharaja
Pariksit, responded to the king’s relevant inquiries by advising him as
follows:

tasmad bharata sarvatma
bhagavan isvaro harih

srotavyah kirtitavyas ca
smartavyas cecchatabhayam

““O descendant of Bharata, it is the duty of mortal men to inquire about,
hear about, glorify, and meditate upon the Personality of Godhead, who
ts the most attractive person because of His fullness in opulence. He is
called Hari because He alone can undo the conditional existence of a living being. If we at all want to be freed from conditional existence, we
must make relevant inquiries about the Absolute Truth so that He
may be pleased to bestow upon us perfect freedom in life.” [SrimadBhagavatam 2.1.5]

Sri Sukadeva Goswami has particularly used four words in regard to
46 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

the Absolute Personality of Godhead. These words distinguish the Absolute Person, or Parabrahman, from other persons, who are
qualitatively one with Him. The Absolute Personality of Godhead is addressed as sarvatma, or all-pervading, because no one is aloof from Him,
although not everyone has this realization. The Personality of Godhead,
by His plenary representation, resides in everyone’s heart as Paramatma,
the Supersoul, along with each individual soul. Therefore every individual soul has an intimate relationship with Him. Forgetfulness of this
eternally existing intimate relationship with Him is the cause of conditional life since time immemorial. But because He is Bhagavan, or the
supreme personality, He can at once reciprocate the responsive call of a
devotee. Moreover, because He is the perfect person, His beauty,
opulence, fame, strength, knowledge, and renunciation are all unlimited
sources of transcendental bliss for the individual soul. The individual
soul becomes attracted by all these different opulences when they are imperfectly represented by other conditioned souls, but the individual soul
is not satisfied by such imperfect representations, and therefore he perpetually seeks the perfect one. The Personality of Godhead’s beauty has
no comparison, nor do His knowledge and renunciation. But above all,
He is isvara, or the supreme controller. We are at present being controlled by the police action of this great king. This police control is imposed upon us because of our disobedience of law. But because the Lord
is Hari, He is able to cause the disappearance of our conditional life by
giving us full freedom in spiritual existence. It is therefore the duty of
every man to make relevant inquiries about Him and thus go back to
Godhead.
Soul Research

Sila Prabhupdda writes a letter to noted cardiologist Dr. Wilfred G. Bigelow:
“The central question, you say, is ‘Where is the soul, and where does it come
from?’ That is not difficult to understand....”

In 1968, speaking before a gathering of students at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Srila Prabhupada points out an important lag in
technological research. ‘‘Although you have so many departments of
knowledge,’’ he says, ‘‘there is no department aiming to find the difference between a living body and a dead body.”’

Although advanced in understanding the mechanical workings of the
physical body, modern science gives but little attention to studying the
spiritual spark that animates the body. In the Montreal Gazette article
reproduced below, we find world-famous cardiologist Wilfred G. Bigelow
urging systematic research to determine what the soul is and where it
comes from. Reproduced next is Srila Prabhupdda’s letter in response to
Dr. Bigelow’s plea. Srila Prabhupada offers substantial Vedic knowledge
on the science of the soul and suggests a practical method for scientifically understanding the spiritual spark.

Gazette Headline:
Heart Surgeon Wants to Know
What a Soul Is

WINDSOR—A_ world-famous Canadian heart surgeon says he
believes the body has a soul which departs at death and theologians ought
to try to find out more about it.

Dr. Wilfred G. Bigelow, head of the cardiovascular surgery unit at
Toronto General Hospital, said that ‘‘as a person who believes there is a
soul,’’ he thought the time had come ‘“‘to take the mystery out of this and
find out what it is.”’

47
48 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Bigelow was a member of a panel which appeared before the Essex
County Medical-Legal Society to discuss problems associated with attempts to define the exact moment of death.

The question has become vital in the age of transplants of hearts and
other organs in cases when the donors are inevitably dying.

The Canadian Medical Association has produced a widely accepted
definition of death as the moment when the patient is in coma, responds
to no stimulus of any kind, and brain waves recorded on a machine are
flat.

The other members of the panel were Mr. Justice Edson L. Haines of
the Ontario Supreme Court and J. Francis Leddy, president of the
University of Windsor.

Bigelow, elaborating on points he had raised during the discussion,
Said in an interview later that his thirty-two years as a surgeon had left
him no doubts that there is a soul.

“There are certain cases where you happen to be present at the moment when people pass from a living state to death, and some mysterious
changes take place.

‘One of the most noticeable is the sudden lack of life or luster to the
eyes. They become opaque and literally lifeless.

‘It’s difficult to document what you observe. In fact, I don’t think it
can be documented very well.”’

Bigelow, who became world renowned for his pioneering work in the
‘“‘deep freeze’’ surgical technique known as hypothermia and for his
heart valve surgery, said ‘‘soul research’’ should be undertaken by
theology and allied disciplines within the university.

During this discussion Leddy said that ‘‘if there is a soul, you are not
going to see it. You are not going to find it.”’

‘If there is a principle of vitality or life, what is it?’’ The problem was
that ‘‘the soul doesn’t exist anywhere specifically, geographically. It’s
everywhere and yet it’s nowhere in the body.”’

It would ‘‘be nice to start experimenting, but I don’t know how you are
going to get on any of these things,’’ Leddy said. He said the discussion
reminded him of the Soviet cosmonaut who returned from space to report there was no God, because he didn’t see Him up there.

Maybe so, said Bigelow, but in modern medicine when something was
encountered that could not be explained, ‘‘the watchword is discover the
answer, take it into the laboratory, take it somewhere where you can discover the truth.”’
Learning the Science of the Soul 49

The central question, said Bigelow, was ‘‘where is the soul and where
does it come from?”’

Srila Prabhupada Gives the Vedic Evidence

My dear Dr. Bigelow:

Please accept my greetings. Recently I have read an article in the
Gazette by Rae Corelli entitled ‘‘Heart Surgeon Wants to Know What a
Soul Is,’’ and it was very interesting. Your comments show great insight,
and so | thought to write you on this matter. Perhaps you may know that I
am the founder-dacarya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. I have several temples in Canada—Montreal, Toronto,
Vancouver, and Hamilton. This Krsna consciousness movement is
specifically meant to teach every soul his original, spiritual position.

Undoubtedly the soul is present in the heart of the living entity, and it
ss the source of all the energies for maintaining the body. The energy of
the soul is spread all over the body, and this is known as consciousness.
Smce this consciousness spreads the energy of the soul all over the body,
ame can feel pains and pleasures in any part of the body. The soul is inG@vidual, and he is transmigrating from one body to another, just as a pergon transmigrates from babyhood to childhood, from childhood to
boyhood, from boyhood to youth, and then to advanced old age. Then
the change called death takes place when we change to a new body, just as
we change our old dress to a new dress. This is called transmigration of
the soul.

When a soul wants to enjoy this material world, forgetting his real
home in the spiritual world, he takes this life of hard struggle for existence. This unnatural life of repeated birth, death, disease, and old age
can be stopped when his consciousness is dovetailed with the supreme consciousness of God. That is the basic principle of our Krsna
movement.

As far as heart transplant is concerned, there is no question of success
unless the soul is there in the heart. So the presence of the soul has to be
accepted. In sexual intercourse, if there is no soul, there is no conception, no pregnancy. Contraception deteriorates the womb so that it no
longer is a good place for the soul. That is against the order of God. By
the order of God, a soul is sent to a particular womb, but by this contraceptive he is denied that womb and has to be placed in another. That is
50 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

disobedience to the Supreme. For example, take a man who is supposed
to live in a particular apartment. If the situation there is so disturbed that
he cannot enter the apartment, then he is put at a great disadvantage.
That is illegal interference and is punishable.

The undertaking of ‘“‘soul research’’ would certainly mark the
advancement of science. But advancement of science will not be able to
find the soul. The soul’s presence can simply be accepted on circumstantial understanding. You will find in the Vedic literature that the dimension of the soul is one ten-thousandth the size of a point. The material
scientist cannot measure the length and breadth of a point. Therefore it is
not possible for the material scientist to capture the soul. You can simply
accept the soul’s existence by taking it from authority. What the greatest
scientists are finding, we’ve explained long ago.

As soon as one understands the existence of the soul, he can immediately understand the existence of God. The difference between God
and the soul is that God is a very great soul, and the living entity is a
very small soul; but qualitatively they are equal. Therefore God is allpervading, and the living entity is localized. But the nature and quality
are the same.

The central question, you say, is “Where is the soul, and where does it
come from?’’ That is not difficult to understand. We have already discussed that the soul is residing in the heart of the living entity and that it
takes shelter in another body after death. Originally the soul comes from
God. Just as a spark comes from fire, and when the spark falls down it appears to be extinguished, the spark of soul originally comes from the
Spiritual world to the material world. In the material world he falls down
into three different conditions, which are called the modes of nature.
When a Spark of fire falls on dry grass, the fiery quality continues; when
the spark falls on the ground, it cannot display its fiery manifestation
unless the ground is favorably situated; and when the spark falls on
water, it becomes extinguished. As such, we find three kinds of living
conditions. One living entity is completely forgetful of his spiritual
nature; another is almost forgetful but still has an instinct of spiritual
nature; and another is completely in search of spiritual perfection. There
is a bona fide method for the attainment of spiritual perfection by the
Spiritual spark of soul, and if he is properly guided then he is very easily
sent back home, back to Godhead, wherefrom he originally fell.

It will be a great contribution to human society if this authorized information from the Vedic literature is presented to the modern world on the
Learning the Science of the Soul 51

basis of modern scientific understanding. The fact is already there. It
simply has to be presented for modern understanding.

Yours sincerely,

A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
 

 

Choosing
a Spiritual Master

 
What Is a Guru?

“In all the sastras [scriptures] the guru is described to be as good as God, but
the guru never says, ‘Iam God.’ The disciple’s duty is to offer respect to the
guru just as he offers respect to God, but the guru never thinks, ‘My disciples
are offering me the same respect they offer to God; therefore I have become
God.’ As soon as he thinks like this, he becomes a dog....”

om ajnana-timirandhasya
caksur unmilitam yena
tasmai Sri-gurave namah

*‘I was born in the darkest ignorance, and my guru, my spiritual master,
Opened my eyes with the torch of knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances unto him.”’

The word ajfidna means “‘ignorance’”’ or “‘darkness.”’ If all the lights in
this room immediately went out, we would not be able to tell where we or
others are sitting. Everything would become confused. Similarly, we are
all in darkness in this material world, which is a world of tamas. Tamas or
timira means ‘“‘darkness.’’ This material world is dark, and therefore it
needs sunlight or moonlight for illumination. However, there is another
world, a spiritual world, that is beyond this darkness. That world is described by Sri Krsna in the Bhagavad-gita [15.6]:

na tad bhasayate stiryo

na sasanko na pavakah
yad gatva na nivartante

tad dhama paramam mama

‘‘That abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by

electricity. One who reaches it never returns to this material world.”’
The guru’s business is to bring his disciples from darkness to light. At

54
Choosing a Spiritual Master 55

present everyone is suffering due to ignorance, just as one contracts a disease out of ignorance. If one does not know hygienic principles, he will
not know what will contaminate him. Therefore due to ignorance there is
infection, and we suffer from disease. A criminal may say, ‘‘I did not
know the law,’ but he will not be excused if he commits a crime. Ignorance is no excuse. Similarly, a child, not knowing that fire will burn,
will touch the fire. The fire does not think, ‘‘This is a child, and he does
not know I will burn.’’ No, there is no excuse. Just as there are state laws,
there are also stringent laws of nature, and these laws will act despite our
ignorance of them. If we do something wrong out of ignorance, we must
suffer. This is the law. Whether the law is a state law or a law of nature,
we risk suffering if we break it.

The guru’s business is to see that no human being suffers in this
material world. No one can claim that he is not suffering. That is not
possible. In this material world, there are three kinds of suffering: adhyatmika, adhibhautika, and adhidaivika. These are miseries arising from the
material body and mind, from other living entities, and from the forces
of nature. We may suffer mental anguish, or we may suffer from other
living entities—from ants or mosquitos or flies—or we may suffer due to
some superior power. There may be no rain, or there may be flood. There
may be excessive heat or excessive cold. So many types of suffering are
imposed by nature. Thus there are three types of miseries within the
material world, and everyone is suffering from one, two, or three of
them. No one can say that he is completely free from suffering.

We may then ask why the living entity is suffering. The answer is: out
of ignorance. He does not think, ‘‘I am committing mistakes and am
leading a sinful life; that is why I am suffering.’ Therefore the guru’s first
business is to rescue his disciple from this ignorance. We send our
children to school to save them from suffering. If our children do not
receive an education, we fear that they will suffer in the future. The guru
sees that suffering is due to ignorance, which is compared to darkness.
How can one in darkness be saved? By light. The guru takes the
torchlight of knowledge and presents it before the living entity enveloped
in darkness. That knowledge relieves him from the sufferings of the
darkness of ignorance.

One may ask whether the guru is absolutely necessary. The Vedas inform us that he is:

tad-vijnanartham sa gurum evabhigacchet
samit-panih srotriyam brahma-nistham
[Mundaka Upanisad 1.2.12]
56 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

The Vedas enjoin us to seek out a guru; actually, they say to seek out the
guru, not just a guru. The guru is one because he comes in disciplic succession. What Vyasadeva and Krsna taught five thousand years ago is
also being taught now. There is no difference between the two instructions. Although hundreds and thousands of dcdryas have come and gone,
the message is one. The real guru cannot be two, for the real guru does
not speak differently from his predecessors. Some spiritual teachers say,
‘*In my opinion you should do this,’’ but this is not a guru. Such so-called
gurus are simply rascals. The genuine guru has only one opinion, and
that is the opinion expressed by Krsna, Vydsadeva, Narada, Arjuna, Sri
Caitanya Mah4aprabhu, and the Goswamis. Five thousand years ago Lord
Sri Krsna spoke the Bhagavad-gita, and Vydsadeva recorded it. Srila
Vyasadeva did not say, ‘‘This is my opinion.’’ Rather, he wrote, sribhagavan uvaca, that is, ‘“The Supreme Personality of Godhead says.”’
Whatever Vyasadeva wrote was originally spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Srila Vydsadeva did not give his own opinion.

Consequently, Srila Vydsadeva is a guru. He does not misinterpret the
words of Krsna, but transmits them exactly as they were spoken. If we
send a telegram, the person who delivers the telegram does not have to
correct it, edit it, or add to it. He simply presents it. That is the guru’s
business. The guru may be this person or that, but the message is the
same; therefore it is said that guru is one.

In the disciplic succession we simply find repetition of the same subject. In the Bhagavad-gita [9.34] Sri Krsna says:

man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yaji mam namaskuru

mam evaisyasi yuktvaivam
atmanam mat-parayanah

‘*Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, become My devotee, offer
obeisances, and worship Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surely
you will come to Me.’’ These very instructions were reiterated by all the
acaryas, such as Raméanujacarya, Madhvacarya, and Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The six Goswamis also transmitted the same message, and we
are simply following in their footsteps. There is no difference. We do not
interpret the words of Krsna by saying, ‘‘In my opinion, the Battlefield of
Kuruksetra represents the human body.’’ Such interpretations are set
forth by rascals. In the world there are many rascal gurus who give their
own opinion, but we can challenge any rascal. A rascal guru may say, “‘I
Choosing a Spiritual Master 57

am God,”’ or, ‘‘We are all God.” That is all right, but we should find out
from the dictionary what the meaning of ‘‘God’’ is. Generally, a dictionary will tell us that the word ‘‘God”’ indicates the Supreme Being. Thus
we may ask such a guru, “‘Are you the Supreme Being?”’ If he cannot understand this, then we should give the meaning of ‘“‘supreme.’’ Any dictionary will inform us that supreme means ‘‘the greatest authority.’ We
may then ask, ‘‘Are you the greatest authority?’’ Such a rascal guru,
even though proclaiming himself to be God, cannot answer such a question. God is the Supreme Being and the highest authority. No one is
equal to Him or greater than Him. Yet there are many guru-gods, many
rascals who claim to be the Supreme. Such rascals cannot help us escape
the darkness of material existence. They cannot illumine our darkness
with the torchlight of spiritual knowledge.

The bona fide guru will simply present what the supreme guru, God,
says in bona fide scripture. A guru cannot change the message of the disciplic succession.

We must understand that we cannot carry out research to find the Absolute Truth. Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself said, ‘‘My Guru Maharaja,
My spiritual master, considered Me a great fool.’’ He who remains a
great fool before his guru is a guru himself. However, if one says, °“‘I am
so advanced that I can speak better than my guru,’’ he is simply a rascal.
In the Bhagavad-gita [4.2] Sri Krsna says:

evam parampara-praptam
imam rajarsayo viduh

sa kaleneha mahata
yogo nastah parantapa

“‘This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way. But in course
of time the succession was broken, and therefore the science as it is appears to be lost.”’

Taking on a guru is not simply a fashion. One who is serious about understanding spiritual life requires a guru. A guru is a question of
necessity, for one must be very serious to understand spiritual life, God,
proper action, and one’s relationship with God. When we are very
serious about understanding these subjects, we need a guru. We
shouldn’t go to a guru simply because a guru may be fashionable at the
moment. Surrender must be there, for without surrender we cannot
learn anything. If we go to a guru simply to challenge him, we will learn
 

58 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

nothing. We must accept the guru just as Arjuna accepted his guru, Sri
Krsna Himself:

karpanya-dosopahata-svabhavah
prcchami tvam dharma-sammiudha-cetah
yac chreyah syan niscitam brthi tan me
Sisyas te ‘ham Ssadhi mam tvam prapannam

**Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because
of weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me clearly what is
best for me. Now I am Your disciple and a soul surrendered unto You.
Please instruct me.’’ [Bhagavad-gita 2.7]

This is the process for accepting a guru. The guru is Krsna’s representative, the former dcaryas’ representative. Krsna says that all d@cdryas are
His representatives; therefore the guru should be offered the same
respect one would offer to God. As Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura says
in his prayers to the spiritual master, yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasadah:
**By the mercy of the spiritual master, one receives the benediction of
Krsna.’ Thus, if we surrender to the bona fide guru, we surrender to
God. God accepts our surrender to the guru.

In the Bhagavad-gita [18.66] Krsna instructs:

sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam Saranam vraja

aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah

**Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.’’ Someone may argue,
‘*“Where is Krsna? I shall surrender to Him.’’ But no, the process is that
we first surrender to Krsna’s representative; then we surrender to Krsna.
Therefore it is said, sa@ksa@d-dharitvena samasta-sastraih: the guru is as
good as God. When we offer respects to the guru, we are offering respects
to God. Because we are trying to be God conscious, it is required that we
learn how to offer respects to God through God’s representative. In all
the sdstras the guru is described to be as good as God, but the guru never
says, ‘‘I am God.”’ The disciple’s duty is to offer respect to the guru just
as he offers respect to God, but the guru never thinks, ‘‘My disciples are
offering me the same respect they offer to God; therefore I have become
God.”’ As soon as he thinks like this, he becomes a dog instead of God.
Choosing a Spiritual Master 59

Therefore Visvanatha Cakravarti says, kintu prabhor yah priya eva tasya.
Because he is the most confidential servitor of God, the guru is offered
the same respect that we offer God. God is always God, guru is always
guru. As a matter of etiquette, God is the worshipable God, and guru is
the worshiper God (sevaka-bhagavan). Therefore the guru is addressed
as prabhupada. The word prabhu means “‘lord,’® and pdda means
“‘position.’’ Thus prabhupdda means “he who has taken the position of
the Lord.’’ This is the same as saksad-dharitvena samasta-sastraih.

Only if we are very serious about understanding the science of God is a
guru required. We should not try to keep a guru as a matter of fashion.
One who has accepted a guru speaks intelligently. He never speaks nonsense. That is the sign of having accepted a bona fide guru. We should
certainly offer all respect to the spiritual master, but we should also
remember how to carry out his orders. In the Bhagavad-gita [4.34] Sri
Krsna Himself tells us the method of seeking out and approaching the
guru:

tad viddhi pranipatena
pariprasnena sevaya

upadeksyanti te jnanam
jndaninas tattva-darsinah

**Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire
from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized
soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.’ The
first process is that of surrender. We have to find an exalted person and
willingly surrender before him. The sdstras enjoin that before we take a
guru we study him carefully to find out whether we can surrender to him.
We should not accept a guru suddenly out of fanaticism. That is very dangerous. The guru should also study the person who wants to become a
disciple to see if he is fit. That is the way a relationship is established between the guru and disciple. Everything is provided, but we must take up
the process seriously. Then we can be trained to become a bona fide disciple. First we must find a bona fide guru, establish our relationship with
him, and act accordingly. Then our life will be successful, for the guru
can enlighten the sincere disciple who is in darkness.

Everyone is born a rascal and a fool. If we are born learned, why do we
need to go to school? If we do not cultivate knowledge, we are no better
than animals. An animal may say that there is no need of books and that
he has become a guru, but how can anyone obtain knowledge without the
60 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

study of authoritative books on science and philosophy? Rascal gurus try
to avoid these things. We must understand that we are all born rascals
and fools and that we have to be enlightened. We have to receive
knowledge to make our lives perfect. If we do not perfect our lives, we
are defeated. What is this defeat? The struggle for existence. We are trying to obtain a better life, to attain a superior position, and for this we are
Struggling very hard. But we do not Know what a superior position
actually is.

Whatever position we have in this material world must be given up.
We may have a good position or a bad position; in any case, we cannot remain here. We may earn millions of dollars and think, ‘‘Now I am in a
good position,’’ but a little dysentery or cholera will finish our position. If
the bank fails, our position is gone. So actually there is no good position
in this material world. It is a farce. Those who try to attain a better position in the material world are ultimately defeated because there is no better position. The Bhagavad-gita [14.26] says what the better position is:

mam ca yo ‘vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate

sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhtyaya kalpate

*‘One who engages in the spiritual activities of unalloyed devotional service at once transcends the modes of material nature and is elevated to
the spiritual platform.”’

Is there any science that gives us the knowledge by which we may
become immortal? Yes, we may become immortal, but not in the
material sense. We cannot receive this knowledge in so-called universities. However, there is knowledge contained in the Vedic scriptures by
which we may become immortal. That immortality is our better position.
No more birth, no more death, no more old age, no more disease. Thus
the guru takes on a very great responsibility. He must guide his disciple
and enable him to become an eligible candidate for the perfect position—
immortality. The guru must be competent to lead his disciple back home,
back to Godhead.
Separating the Saints
From the Swindlers

Sila Prabhupdda speaks out in an interview with the London Times: “If you
want to be cheated, you will find many cheating gurus. But if you are sincere,
you will find a sincere guru... . The genuine guru is God's representative, and
he speaks about God and nothing else. ... A genuine guru is not a businessman. He is a representative of God. Whatever God says, the guru repeats. He
does not speak otherwise.”

Reporter: Your Grace, it seems that more people than ever are seeking
some kind of spiritual life. I wonder if you could tell me why this is so.
Szila Prabhupada: The desire for spiritual life is an absolutely natural
hankering. Because we are spirit souls, we cannot be happy in the
material atmosphere. If you take a fish out of the water, it cannot be
happy on land. Similarly, if we are without spiritual consciousness, we
can never be happy. Today, so many people are after scientific advancement and economic development, but they are not happy because these
are not the actual goals of life. Many young people are realizing this, and
they are rejecting materialistic life and are trying to search for spiritual
life. Actually, this is the proper search. Krsna consciousness is the proper
goal of life. Unless you take to Krsna consciousness, you cannot be
happy. That is a fact. Therefore, we invite everyone to study and understand this great movement.

Reporter: What frankly worries me is that since the arrival in Britain
some time ago of an Indian yogi, who was the first ‘“‘guru’’ that most people had ever heard of, a lot of ‘‘gurus’’ have suddenly appeared out of
nowhere. Sometimes I get the feeling that not all of them are as genuine
they ought to be. Would it be right to warn people who are thinking of
taking up spiritual life that they should make sure that they have a
genuine guru to teach them?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Of course, to search out a guru is very nice, but
if you want a cheap guru, or if you want to be cheated, then you will find
many cheating gurus. But if you are sincere, you will find a sincere guru.
Because people want everything very cheaply, they are cheated. We ask

61
62 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

our students to refrain from illicit sex, meat eating, gambling, and intoxication. People think that this is all very difficult—a botheration. But if
someone else says, ““You may do whatever nonsense you like, simply
take my mantra,’’ then people will like him. The point is that people want
to be cheated, and therefore cheaters come. No one wants to undergo any
austerity. Human life is meant for austerity, but no one is prepared to
undergo austerity. Consequently, cheaters come and say, °‘No austerity.
Whatever you like, you do. Simply pay me, and I'll give you some
mantra, and you'll become God in six months.”’ All this is going on. If
you want to be cheated like this, the cheaters will come.

Reporter: What about the person who seriously wants to find spiritual
life but who happens to finish up with the wrong guru?

Srila Prabhupada: If you simply want an ordinary education, you have
to devote so much time, labor, and understanding to it. Similarly, if you
are going to take to spiritual life, you must become serious. How is it that
simply by some wonderful mantras, someone can become God in six
months? Why do people want something like that? This means that they
want to be cheated.

Reporter: How can a person tell he has a genuine guru?

Srila Prabhupada: Can any of my students answer this question?
Disciple: Once I remember John Lennon asked you, ““How will I know
who is the genuine guru?’’ And you answered, ‘‘Just find out the one
who is most addicted to Krsna. He is genuine.”’

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. The genuine guru is God’s representative, and
he speaks about God and nothing else. The genuine guru is he who has
no interest in materialistic life. He is after God, and God only. That is
one of the tests of a genuine guru: brahma-nistham. He is absorbed in the
Absolute Truth. In the Mundaka Upanisad it is stated, srotriyam brahmanistham: °*‘The genuine guru is well versed in the scriptures and Vedic
knowledge, and he is completely dependent on Brahman.’’ He should
know what Brahman [spirit] is and how to become situated in Brahman.
These signs are given in the Vedic literature. As I said before, the real
guru is God’s representative. He represents the Supreme Lord, just as a
viceroy represents a king. The real guru will not manufacture anything.
Everything he says is in accordance with the scriptures and the previous
acaryas. He will not give you a mantra and tell you that you will become
God in six months. This is not a guru’s business. A guru’s business is to
Canvass everyone to become a devotee of God. That is the sum and substance of a real guru’s business. Indeed, he has no other business. He
tells whomever he sees, ‘‘Please become God conscious.”’ If he canChoosing a Spiritual Master 63

vasses somehow or other on behalf of God and tries to get everyone to
become a devotee of God, he is a genuine guru.

Reporter: What about a Christian priest?

Srila Prabhupada: Christian, Muhammadan, Hindu—it doesn’t matter.
If he is simply speaking on behalf of God, he is a guru. Lord Jesus Christ,
for instance. He canvassed people, saying, ‘‘Just try to love God.”’ Anyone—it doesn’t matter who—be he Hindu, Muslim, or Christian, is a
guru if he convinces people to love God. That is the test. The guru never
says, ‘Iam God,”’ or “‘I will make you God.”’ The real guru says, ‘‘Iam a
servant of God, and I will make you a servant of God also.’’ It doesn’t
matter how the guru is dressed. As Caitanya Mahaprabhu said,
““Whoever can impart knowledge about Krsna is a spiritual master.’’ A
genuine spiritual master simply tries to get people to become devotees of
Krsna, or God. He has no other business.

Reporter: But the bad gurus...

Srila Prabhupada: And what is a ‘‘bad”’ guru?

Reporter: A bad guru just wants some money or some fame.

Srila Prabhupada: Well, if he is bad, how can he become a guru?
{Laughter.] How can iron become gold? Actually, a guru cannot be bad,
for if someone is bad, he cannot be a guru. You cannot say ‘‘bad guru.”’
That is a contradiction. What you have to do is simply try to understand
what a genuine guru is. The definition of a genuine guru is that he is
simply talking about God—that’s all. If he’s talking about some other
nonsense, then he is not a guru. A guru cannot be bad. There is no question of a bad guru, any more than a red guru or a white guru. Guru means
“‘genuine guru.’’ All we have to know is that the genuine guru is simply
talking about God and trying to get people to become God’s devotees. If
he does this, he is genuine.

Reporter: If I wanted to be initiated into your society, what would I have
to do?

Srila Prabhupada: First of all, you’d have to give up illicit sex life.
Reporter: Does that include all sex life? What is illicit sex life?

Srila Prabhupada: Illicit sex is sex outside of marriage. Animals have
sex with no restrictions, but in human society there are restrictions. In
every country and in every religion, there is some system of restricting
sex life. You would also have to give up all intoxicants, including tea,
agarettes, alcohol, marijuana—anything that intoxicates.

Reporter: Anything else?

Srila Prabhupada: You'd also have to give up eating meat, eggs, and
fish. And you’d have to give up gambling as well. Unless you gave up
64 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

these four sinful activities, you could not be initiated.

Reporter: How many followers do you have throughout the world?
Srila Prabhupada: For anything genuine, the followers may be very few.
For something rubbish, the followers may be many. Still, we have about
five thousand initiated disciples.

Reporter: Is the Krsna consciousness movement growing all the time?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes, it is growing—but slowly. This is because we
have so many restrictions. People do not like restrictions. _
Reporter: Where is your following the greatest?

Srila Prabhupada: In the United States, Europe, South America, and
Australia. And, of course, in India there are millions who practice Krsna
consciousness.

Reporter: Could you tell me what the goal of your movement is?
Srila Prabhupada: The purpose of this Krsna consciousness movement
is to awaken man’s original consciousness. At the present moment our
consciousness is designated. Someone is thinking, °‘I am an Englishman,’ and another is thinking, ‘‘1 am an American.’’ Actually, we do
not belong to any of these designations. We are all part and parcel of
God; that is our real identity. If everyone simply comes to that consciousness, all the problems of the world will be solved. Then we shall come to
know that we are one—the same quality of spirit soul. The same quality
of spirit soul is within everyone, although it may be in a different dress.
This is the explanation given in the Bhagavaa-gita.

Krsna consciousness is actually a purificatory process (sarvopddhi-vinirmuktam). Its purpose is to make people free from all designations (tatparatvena nirmalam). When our consciousness becomes purified of all
designations, the activities we carry out with our purified senses make us
perfect. Eventually, we reach the ideal perfection of human life. Krsna
consciousness is also a very simple process. It is not necessary to become
a great philosopher, scientist, or whatever. We need only chant the holy
name of the Lord, understanding that His personality, His name, and His
qualities are all absolute.

Krsna consciousness is a great science. Unfortunately, in the universities there is no department for this science. Therefore we invite all
serious men who are interested in the welfare of human society to understand this great movement and, if possible, take part in it and cooperate
with us. The problems of the world will be solved. This is also the verdict
of the Bhagavad-gita, the most important and authoritative book of
spiritual knowledge. Many of you have heard of the Bhagavad-gita. Our
movement is based on it. Our movement is approved by all great dcadryas
Choosing a Spiritual Master 65

m India. Ramanujacarya, Madhvacarya, Lord Caitanya, and so many
others. You are all representatives of newspapers, so I ask you to try to
understand this movement as far as possible for the good of all human
society. ,
Reporter: Do you think your movement is the only way to know God?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes.
Reporter: How are you assured of that?
Srila Prabhupada: From the authorities and from God, Krsna. Krsna
says:
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam Saranam vraja
aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah

“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.”’ [Bhagavad-gitd 18.66]
Reporter: Does ‘“‘surrender’’ mean that someone would have to leave his
family?

Seila Prabhupada: No.

Regorter: But suppose I were to become an initiate. Wouldn’t I have to
come and live in the temple?

Sila Prabhupada: Not necessarily.

Reporter: I can stay at home?

Sila Prabhupada: Oh, yes.

Reporter: What about work? Would I have to give up my job?

Ssila Prabhupada: No, you’d simply have to give up your bad habits and
chant the Hare Krsna mantra on these beads—that’s all.

Reporter: Would I have to give any financial support?

Ssila Prabhupada: No, that is your voluntary wish. If you give, that’s all
nght. And if you don’t, we don’t mind. We do not depend on anyone’s fimancial contribution. We depend on Krsna.

Reporter: I wouldn’t have to give any money at all?

Ssila Prabhupada: No.

Reporter: Is this one of the main things that distinguishes the genuine
guru from the fake guru?

Ssila Prabhupada: Yes, a genuine guru is not a businessman. He is a
representative of God. Whatever God says, the guru repeats. He does not
speak otherwise.

Reporter: But would you expect to find a real guru, say, traveling in a
Rolls Royce and staying in a penthouse suite in a classy hotel?
66 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Srila Prabhupada: Sometimes people provide us with a room in a firstclass hotel, but we generally stay in our own temples. We have some one
hundred temples around the world, so we don’t require to go to any
hotels. |

Reporter: I wasn’t trying to make any accusations. I was merely trying to
illustrate that I think your warning is a valid one. There are so many people interested in finding a spiritual life, and at the same time there are a
lot of people interested in cashing in on the ‘‘guru business.”’

Srila Prabhupada: Are you under the impression that spiritual life
means voluntarily accepting poverty?

Reporter: Well, I don’t know.

Srila Prabhupada: A poverty-stricken man may be materialistic, and a
wealthy man may be very spiritual. Spiritual life does not depend on
either poverty or wealth. Spiritual life is transcendental. Consider Arjuna, for instance. Arjuna was a member of a royal family, yet he was a
pure devotee of God. And in the Bhagavad-gita [4.2] Sri Krsna says,
evam parampara-praptam imam rajarsayo viduh: ‘‘This supreme science
was received through the chain of disciplic succession, and the saintly
kings understood it in that way.’’ In the past, all kings who were saintly
understood spiritual science. Therefore, spiritual life does not depend on
one’s material condition. Whatever a person’s material condition may
be—he may be a king or a pauper—he can still understand spiritual life.
Generally people do not know what spiritual life is, and therefore, they
unnecessarily criticize us. If I asked you what spiritual life is, how would
you answer?

Reporter: Well, I’m not sure.

Srila Prabhupada: Although you do not know what spiritual life is, you
still say, ‘‘It is this,’ or ‘‘It is that.’’ But first you should know what
Spiritual life is. Spiritual life begins when you understand that you are not
your body. This is the real beginning of spiritual life. By seeing the
difference between your self and your body, you come to understand that
you are a spirit soul (aham brahmdsmi).

Reporter: Do you think this knowledge should be a part of everyone’s
education? .

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. People should first be taught what they are. Are
they their bodies, or something else? That is the beginning of education.
Now everyone is educated to think he is his body. Because someone accidentally gets an American body, he thinks, ‘‘I am an American.’’ This is
just like thinking, ‘‘Il am a red shirt,’’ just because you are wearing a red
Choosing a Spiritual Master 67

shirt. You are not a red shirt; you are a human being. Similarly, this body
is like a shirt or coat over the real person—the spirit soul. If we recognize
ourselves simply by our bodily ‘“‘shirt’’ or “‘coat,’’ then we have no
spiritual education.

Reporter: Do you think that such education should be given in schools?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes—in schools, colleges, and universities. There is
an immense literature on this subject—an immense fund of knowledge.
What is actually required is that the leaders of society come forward to
understand this movement.

Reporter: Have you ever had people come to you who had previously
been involved with a fake guru?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, there are many.

Reporter: Were their spiritual lives in any way spoiled by the fake gurus?
Srila Prabhupada: No, they were genuinely seeking something spiritual,
and that was their qualification. God is within everyone’s heart, and as
soon as someone genuinely seeks Him, He helps that person find a
genuine guru.

Reporter: Have the real gurus like yourself ever tried to put a stop to the
false gurus—that is, put pressure on them to put them out of business, so
to speak.

Srila Prabhupada: No, that is not my purpose. I started my movement
simply by chanting Hare Krsna. I chanted in New York in a place called
Tompkins Square Park, and soon people began to come to me. In this
way, the Krsna consciousness movement gradually developed. Many accepted, and many did not accept. Those who are fortunate have accepted.
Reporter: Don’t you feel that people are suspicious because of their experience with fake gurus? If you went to a quack dentist and he broke
your tooth, you might be suspicious about going to another dentist.
Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Naturally, if you are cheated, you become
suspicious. But this does not mean that if you are cheated once, you will
always be cheated. You should find someone genuine. But to come to
Krsna consciousness, you must be either very fortunate or well aware of
this science. From the Bhagavad-gita we understand that the genuine
seekers are very few: manusyanam sahasresu kascid yatati siddhaye. Out of
many millions of people, there may be only one who is interested in
spiritual life. Generally, people are interested in eating, sleeping, mating,
and defending. So how can we expect to find many followers? It is not
difficult to notice that people have lost their spiritual interest. And almost
all those who are actually interested are being cheated by so-called
68 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Spiritualists. You cannot judge a movement simply by the number of its
followers. If one man is genuine, then the movement is successful. It is
not a question of quantity, but quality.

Reporter: I wondered how many people you think might have been
taken in by fake gurus.

Srila Prabhupada: Practically everyone. [Laughter.] There is no question of counting. Everyone.

Reporter: This would mean thousands of people, wouldn’t it?

Srila Prabhupada: Millions. Millions have been cheated, because they
want to be cheated. God is omniscient. He can understand your desires.
He is within your heart, and if you want to be cheated, God sends you a
cheater.

Reporter: Is it possible for everyone to attain the perfectional stage you
spoke of previously?

Srila Prabhupada: Within a second. Anyone can attain perfection within
a second—providing he is willing. The difficulty is that no one is willing.
In the Bhagavad-gita [18.66] Krsna says, sarva-dharman parityajya mam
ekam Saranam vraja: ‘‘Simply surrender unto Me.’’ But who is going to
surrender to God? Everyone says, ‘Oh, why should I surrender to God?
I will be independent.”’ If you simply surrender, it is a second’s business.
That’s all. But no one is willing, and that is the difficulty.

Reporter: When you say that lots of people want to be cheated, do you
mean that lots of people want to carry on with their worldly pleasures and
at the same time, by chanting a mantra or by holding a flower, achieve
Spiritual life as well? Is this what you mean by wanting to be cheated?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes, this is like a patient thinking, ‘‘I shall continue
with my disease, and at the same time I shall become healthy.’’ It is contradictory. The first requirement is that one become educated in spiritual
life. Spiritual life is not something one can understand by a few minutes’
talk. There are many philosophy and theology books, but people are not
interested in them. That is the difficulty. For instance, the SrimadBhagavatam is a very long work, and if you try to read this book, it may
take many days just to understand one line of it. The Bhdgavatam describes God, the Absolute Truth, but people are not interested. And if,
by chance, someone becomes a little interested in spiritual life, he wants
something immediate and cheap. Therefore, he is cheated. Actually,
human life is meant for austerity and penance. That is the way of Vedic
civilization. In Vedic times they would train boys as brahmacdris; no sex
life was allowed at all up to the age of twenty-five. Where is that education now? A brahmacariis a student who lives a life of complete celibacy
Choosing a Spiritual Master 69

and obeys the commands of his guru at the guru-kula [school of the
spiritual master]. Now schools and colleges are teaching sex from the
very beginning, and twelve- or thirteen-year-old boys and girls are having sex. How can they have a spiritual life? Spiritual life means voluntanly accepting some austerities for the sake of God realization. That is
why we insist on no illicit sex, meat eating, gambling, or intoxication for
our initiated students. Without these restrictions, any “‘yoga meditation’”’
or so-called spiritual discipline cannot be genuine. It is simply a business
deal between the cheaters and the cheated.

Reoorter: Thank you very much.

Ssila Prabhupada: Hare Krsna.
‘With All the Humility at My Command’’

It is February 1936, in Bombay. The pure devotee who three decades later will
become the world-renowned spiritual master of the Krsna consciousness
movement glorifies his own spiritual master. Here we learn the time-honored
meaning of the spiritual master, the disciple, and their relationship. . . .

saksad-dharitvena samasta-sastrair
uktas tatha bhavyata eva sadbhih

kintu prabhor yah priya eva tasya
vande guroh sri-caranaravindam

“*In the revealed scriptures it is declared that the spiritual master should
be worshiped like the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and this injunction is obeyed by pure devotees of the Lord. The spiritual master is the
most confidential servant of the Lord. Thus let us offer our respectful
obeisances unto the lotus feet of our spiritual master.”

Gentlemen, on behalf of the members of the Bombay branch of the
Gaudiya Matha, let me welcome you all because you have so kindly
joined us tonight in our congregational offerings of homage to the lotus
feet of the world teacher, Acaryadeva, who is the founder of this Gaudiya
Mission and is the president-dcdarya of Sri Sri Visva-vaisnava Rajasabha—I mean my eternal divine master, Paramahamsa Parivrajakacarya
Sri Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Goswami Maharaja.

Sixty-two years ago, on this auspicious day, the Acaryadeva made his
appearance by the call of Thakura Bhaktivinoda at Sri-ksetra Jagannathadhama at Puri.

Gentlemen, the offering of such an homage as has been arranged this
evening to the Acaryadeva is not a sectarian concern, for when we speak
of the fundamental principle of gurudeva, or adcdryadeva, we speak of
something that is of universal application. There does not arise any question of discriminating my guru from yours or anyone else’s. There is only

70
Choosing a Spiritual Master 71

one guru, who appears in an infinity of forms to teach you, me, and all
others.

The guru, or dcdryadeva, as we learn from the bona fide scriptures,
delivers the message of the absolute world, the transcendental abode of
the Absolute Personality, where everything nondifferentially serves the
Absolute Truth. We have heard so many times: mahdjano yena gatah sa
panthah (‘‘Traverse the trail which your previous dcdrya has passed’’),
but we have hardly tried to understand the real purport of this sloka. If we
scrutinizingly study this proposition, we understand that the mahdjana is
one, and the royal road to the transcendental world is also one. In the
Mundaka Upanisad [1.2.12] it is said:

LO dd

samit-panih srotriyam brahma-nistham

“In order to learn the transcendental science, one must approach the
bona fide spiritual master in disciplic succession, who is fixed in the
Absolute Truth.”’

Thus it has been enjoined herewith that in order to receive that transcendental knowledge, one must approach the guru. Therefore, if the
Absolute Truth is one, about which we think there is no difference of
opinion, the guru also cannot be two. The Acdryadeva for whom we have
assembled tonight to offer our humble homage is not the guru of a sectunan institution or one out of many differing exponents of the truth. On
the contrary, he is the Jagad-guru, or the guru of all of us; the only difference is that some obey him wholeheartedly, while others do not obey
fm directly.

In the Srimad-Bhagavatam [11.17.27] it is said:

acaryam mam vijaniyan
navamanyeta Karhicit

na martya-buddhyastyeta
sarva-devamayo guruh

“One should understand the spiritual master to be as good as I am,”’ said
the Blessed Lord. ‘‘Nobody should be jealous of the spiritual master or
@unk of him as an ordinary man, because the spiritual master is the sum
total of all demigods.’’ That is, the dcdrya has been identified with God
Hamself. He has nothing to do with the affairs of this mundane world.
He does not descend here to meddle with the affairs of temporary
72 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

necessities, but to deliver the fallen, conditioned souls—the souls, or entities, who have come here to the material world with a motive of enjoyment by the mind and the five organs of sense perception. He appears
before us to reveal the light of the Vedas and to bestow upon us the blessings of full-fledged freedom, after which we should hanker at every step
of our life’s journey.

The transcendental knowledge of the Vedas was first uttered by God to
Brahma, the creator of this particular universe. From Brahma the
knowledge descended to Narada, from Narada to Vydsadeva, from
Vyasadeva to Madhva, and in this process of disciplic succession the
transcendental knowledge was transmitted by one disciple to another till
it reached Lord Gauranga, Sri Krsna Caitanya, who posed as the disciple
and successor of Sri Isvara Puri. The present Acaryadeva is the tenth disciplic representative from Sri Ripa Goswami, the original representative
of Lord Caitanya who preached this transcendental tradition in its fullness. The knowledge that we receive from our Gurudeva is not different
from that imparted by God Himself and the succession of the d@cdaryas in
the preceptorial line of Brahma. We adore this auspicious day as Sri
Vydsa-puja-tithi because the Acdarya is the living representative of
Vyasadeva, the divine compiler of the Vedas, the Purdnas, the Bhagavadgita, the Mahabharata, and the Srimad-Bhagavatam.

One who interprets the divine sound, or sabda-brahma, by his imperfect sense perception cannot be a real spiritual guru, because, in the
absence of proper disciplinary training under the bona fide dcdrya, the
interpreter is sure to differ from Vydsadeva (as the Mayavadis do). Srila
Vyasadeva is the prime authority of Vedic revelation, and therefore such
an irrelevant interpreter cannot be accepted as the guru, or dcarya,
howsoever equipped he may be with all the acquirements of material
knowledge. As it is said in the Padma Purana:

sampradaya-vihina ye
mantras te nisphala matah

‘*Unless you are initiated by a bona fide spiritual master in the disciplic
succession, the mantra that you might have received is without any
effect.”’

On the other hand, one who has received the transcendental
knowledge by aural reception from the bona fide preceptor in the disciplic
chain, and who has sincere regard for the real d@cdrya, must needs be
enlightened with the revealed knowledge of the Vedas. But this knowlChoosing a Spiritual Master 73

edge is permanently sealed to the cognitive approach of the empiricists.
As it is said in the Svetasvatara Upanisad [6.23]:

yasya deve para bhaktir
yatha deve tathd gurau

tasyaite kathita hy arthah
prakasante mahatmanah

‘Only unto those great souls who simultaneously have implicit faith in
both the Lord and the spiritual master are all the imports of Vedic
knowledge automatically revealed.”’

Gentlemen, our knowledge is so poor, our senses are so imperfect, and
our sources are so limited that it is not possible for us to have even the
slightest knowledge of the absolute region without surrendering ourselves at the lotus feet of Sri Vyasadeva or his bona fide representative.
Every moment we are being deceived by the knowledge of our direct perception. It is all the creation or concoction of the mind, which is always
deceiving, changing, and flickering. We cannot know anything of the
transcendental region by our limited, perverted method of observation
and experiment. But all of us can lend our eager ears for the aural reception of the transcendental sound transmitted from that region to this
through the unadulterated medium of Sri Gurudeva or Sri Vyasadeva.
Therefore, gentlemen, we should surrender ourselves today at the feet of
the representative of Sri Vydsadeva for the elimination of all our
differences bred by our unsubmissive attitude. It is accordingly said in Sri
Gita [4.34]:

tad viddhi pranipatena
pariprasnena sevaya

upadeksyanti te jnanam
jndaninas tattva-darsinah

‘‘Just approach the wise and bona fide spiritual master. Surrender unto
him first and try to understand him by inquiries and service. Such a wise
Spiritual master will enlighten you with transcendental knowledge, for he
has already known the Absolute Truth.”’

To receive the transcendental knowledge we must completely surrender ourselves to the real dcdrya in a spirit of ardent inquiry and service. Actual performance of service to the Absolute under the guidance
of the dcdrya is the only vehicle by which we can assimilate the transcendental knowledge. Today’s meeting for offering our humble services and
74 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

homage to the feet of the Acdryadeva will enable us to be favored with
the capacity for assimilating the transcendental knowledge so kindly
transmitted by him to all persons, without distinction.

Gentlemen, we are all more or less proud of our past Indian civilization, but we actually do not know the real nature of that civilization. We
cannot be proud of our past material civilization, which is now a thousand times greater than in days gone by. It is said that we are passing
through the age of darkness, the Kali-yuga. What is this darkness? The
darkness cannot be due to backwardness in material knowledge, because
we now have more of it than formerly. If not we ourselves, our neighbors
at any rate have plenty of it. Therefore, we must conclude that the darkness of the present age is not due to a lack of material advancement, but
that we have lost the clue to our spiritual advancement, which is the
prime necessity of human life and the criterion of the highest type of
human civilization. Throwing of bombs from airplanes is no advancement of civilization from the primitive, uncivilized practice of dropping
big stones on the heads of enemies from the tops of hills. Improvement
of the art of killing our neighbors by means of machine guns and
poisonous gases is certainly no advancement from primitive barbarism,
which prided itself on its art of killing by bows and arrows. Nor does the
development of a sense of pampered selfishness prove anything more
than intellectual animalism. True human civilization is very different
from all these states, and therefore in the Katha Upanisad {1.3.14] there
is the emphatic call:

uttisthata jagrata
prapya varan nibodhata

ksurasya dharda nisita duratyaya
durgam pathas tat kavayo vadanti

**Please wake up and try to understand the boon which you now have in
this human form of life. The path of spiritual realization is very difficult;
it is sharp like a razor’s edge. That is the opinion of learned transcendental scholars.”’

Thus, while others were yet in the womb of historical oblivion, the
sages of India had developed a different kind of civilization, which
enabled them to know themselves. They had discovered that we are not
at all material entities, but that we are all spiritual, permanent, and indestructible servants of the Absolute. But because we have, against our
Choosing a Spiritual Master 75

better judgment, chosen to completely identify ourselves with this present material existence, our sufferings have multiplied according to the
mexorable law of birth and death, with its consequent diseases and anxieties. These sufferings cannot be really mitigated by any provision of
material happiness, because matter and spirit are completely different
elements. It is just as if you took an aquatic animal out of water and put it
on the land, supplying all manner of happiness possible on land. The
deadly sufferings of the animal are not capable of being relieved at all untal it is taken out of its foreign environment. Spirit and matter are completely contradictory things. All of us are spiritual entities. We cannot
have perfect happiness, which is our birthright, however much we may
meddle with the affairs of mundane things. Perfect happiness can be ours
only when we are restored to our natural state of spiritual existence. This
t the distinctive message of our ancient Indian civilization, this is the
message of the Gitd, this is the message of the Vedas and the Puranas, and
this is the message of all the real dcdryas, including our present
Acaryadeva, in the line of Lord Caitanya.

Gentlemen, although it is imperfectly that we have been enabled by
lis grace to understand the sublime messages of our Acdryadeva, Orn
Visnupada Paramaharnsa Parivrajakacarya Sri Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Goswami Maharaja, we must admit that we have realized
@efinitely that the divine message from his holy lips is the congenial thing
for suffering humanity. All of us should hear him patiently. If we listen to
the transcendental sound without unnecessary opposition, he will surely
lusve mercy upon us. The Acdrya’s message is to take us back to our
anginal home, back to God. Let me repeat, therefore, that we should
hear him patiently, follow him in the measure of our conviction, and bow
down at his lotus feet for releasing us from our present causeless unwullingness for serving the Absolute and all souls.

From the Gitd we learn that even after the destruction of the body, the
@omd, or the soul, is not destroyed; he is always the same, always new and
Gesh. Fire cannot burn him, water cannot dissolve him, the air cannot
d@zy him up, and the sword cannot kill him. He is everlasting and eternal,
and this is also confirmed in the Srimad-Bhdgavatam [10.84.13]:

yasyatma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke
sva-dhih kalatradisu bhauma ijya-dhih

yat-tirtha-buddhih salile na karhicij
janesv abhijnesu sa eva go-kharah
76 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

‘“Anyone who accepts this bodily bag of three elements [bile, mucus, and
air] as his self, who has an affinity for an intimate relationship with his
wife and children, who considers his land worshipable, who takes bath in
the waters of the holy places of pilgrimage but never takes advantage of
those persons who are in actual knowledge—he is no better than an ass or
a cow.”

Unfortunately, in these days we have all been turned foolish by
neglecting our real comfort and identifying the material cage with ourselves. We have concentrated all our energies for the meaningless
upkeep of the material cage for its own sake, completely neglecting the
captive soul within. The cage is meant for the undoing of the bird; the
bird is not meant for the welfare of the cage. Let us, therefore, deeply
ponder this. All our activities are now turned toward the upkeep of the
cage, and the most we do is try to give some food to the mind by art and
literature. But we do not Know that this mind is also material in a more
subtle form. This is stated in the Gita [7.4]:

bhiimir apo ‘nalo vayuh
kham mano buddhir eva ca
ahankara itiyam me
bhinna prakrtir astadha

‘‘Earth, fire, water, air, sky, intelligence, mind, and ego are all My separated energies.”’

We have scarcely tried to give any food to the soul, which is distinct
from the body and mind; therefore we are all committing suicide in the
proper sense of the term. The message of the Acaryadeva is to give us a
warning to halt such wrong activities. Let us therefore bow down at
his lotus feet for the unalloyed mercy and kindness he has bestowed
upon us.

Gentlemen, do not for a moment think that my Gurudeva wants to put
a complete brake on the modern civilization—an impossible feat. But let
us learn from him the art of making the best use of a bad bargain, and let
us understand the importance of this human life, which is fit for the highest development of true consciousness. The best use of this rare human
life should not be neglected. As it is said in the Srimad-Bhagavatam
[11.9.29]:

labdhva sudurlabham idam bahu-sambhavante
manusyam arthadam anityam apiha dhirah
Choosing a Spiritual Master 77

turnam yateta na pated anumrtyu yavan
nihsreyasaya visayah khalu sarvatah syat

“This human form of life is obtained after many, many births, and
although it is not permanent, it can offer the highest benefits. Therefore a
sober and intelligent man should immediately try to fulfill his mission
and attain the highest profit in life before another death occurs. He
should avoid sense gratification, which is available in all circumstances.”’
Let us not misuse this human life in the vain pursuit of material enjoyment, or, in other words, for the sake of only eating, sleeping, fearing,
and sensuous activities. The Acdryadeva’s message is conveyed by the
words of Sri Ripa Goswami [ Bhakti-rasadmrta-sindhu1.2.255, 256]:

anasaktasya visayan
yatharham upayunjatah

nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe
yuktam vairagyam ucyate

prapancikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunah

mumuksubhih parityago
vairagyam phalgu kathyate

*“One is said to be situated in the fully renounced order of life if he lives
m accordance with Krsna consciousness. He should be without attachment for sense gratification and should accept only what is necessary for
the upkeep of the body. On the other hand, one who renounces things
which could be used in the service of Krsna, under the pretext that such
things are material, does not practice complete renunciation.”’

The purport of these s/okas can only be realized by fully developing the
rasonal portion of our life, not the animal portion. Sitting at the feet of
the Acdryadeva, let us try to understand from this transcendental source
of knowledge what we are, what is this universe, what is God, and what is
our relationship with Him. The message of Lord Caitanya is the message
for the living entities and the message of the living world. Lord Caitanya
did not bother Himself for the upliftment of this dead world, which is
suitably named Martyaloka, the world where everything is destined to
die. He appeared before us four hundred fifty years ago to tell us something of the transcendental universe, where everything is permanent and
78 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

everything is for the service of the Absolute. But recently Lord Caitanya
has been misrepresented by some unscrupulous persons, and the highest
philosophy of the Lord has been misinterpreted to be the cult of the
lowest type of society. We are glad to announce tonight that our
Acaryadeva, with his usual kindness, saved us from this horrible type of
degradation, and therefore we bow down at his lotus feet with all
humility.

Gentlemen, it has been a mania of the cultured (or uncultured) society
of the present day to accredit the Personality of Godhead with merely impersonal features and to stultify Him by claiming that He has no senses,
no form, no activity, no head, no legs, and no enjoyment. This has also
been the pleasure of the modern scholars due to their sheer lack of
proper guidance and true introspection in the spiritual realm. All these
empiricists think alike: all the enjoyable things should be monopolized by
the human society, or by a particular class only, and the impersonal God
should be a mere order-supplier for their whimsical feats. We are happy
that we have been relieved of this horrible type of malady by the mercy of
His Divine Grace Paramahamsa Parivrajakacarya Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvat! Goswami Maharaja. He is our eye-opener, our eternal father, our
eternal preceptor, and our eternal guide. Let us therefore bow down at
his lotus feet on this auspicious day.

Gentlemen, although we are like ignorant children in the knowledge of
the Transcendence, still His Divine Grace, my Gurudeva, has kindled a
small fire within us to dissipate the invincible darkness of empirical
knowledge. We are now so much on the safe side that no amount of
philosophical argument by the empiric schools of thought can deviate us
an inch from the position of our eternal dependence on the lotus feet of
His Divine Grace. Furthermore, we are prepared to challenge the most
erudite scholars of the Mayavada school and prove that the Personality of
Godhead and His transcendental sports in Goloka alone constitute the
sublime information of the Vedas. There are explicit indications of this in
the Chdndogya Upanisad [8.13.1]:

syamac chavalam prapadye
Savalac chyamam prapadye

"For receiving the mercy of Krsna, I surrender unto His energy
(Radha), and for receiving the mercy of His energy, I surrender unto
Krsna.’” Also in the Rg Veda [1.2.22.20]:
Qhoosing a Spiritual Master 719

tad visnoh paramam padam
sada pasyanti surayah
diviva caksur atatam
visnor yat paramam padam

“*The lotus feet of Lord Visnu are the supreme objective of all the demigods. These lotus feet of the Lord are as enlightening as the sun in
the sky.”’

The plain truth so vividly explained in the Gita, which is the central
kesson of the Vedas, is not understood or even suspected by the most
powerful scholars of the empiric schools. Herein lies the secret of Sri
Vyasa-pija. When we meditate on the transcendental pastimes of the
Absolute Godhead, we are proud to feel that we are His eternal servitors,
and we become jubilant and dance with joy. All glory to my divine
gaaster, for it is he who has out of his unceasing flow of mercy stirred up
within us such a movement of eternal existence. Let us bow down at his
lotus feet.

Gentlemen, had he not appeared before us to deliver us from the
thralldom of this gross worldly delusion, surely we should have remained
for lives and ages in the darkness of helpless captivity. Had he not appeared before us, we would not have been able to understand the eternal
trsth of the sublime teaching of Lord Caitanya. Had he not appeared
before us, we could not have been able to know the significance of the
Grst sloka of the Brahma-samhita:

isvarah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah

anadir adir govindah
sarva-karana-karanam

“Krsna, who is known as Govinda, is the Supreme Godhead. He has an
eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other
origin, and He is the prime cause of all causes.”’

Personally, [ have no hope for any direct service for the coming crores
of births of the sojourn of my life, but I am confident that some day or
other I shall be delivered from this mire of delusion in which I am at present so deeply sunk. Therefore let me with all my earnestness pray at the
lotus feet of my divine master to allow me to suffer the lot for which I am
destined due to my past misdoings, but to let me have this power of
80 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

recollection: that I am nothing but a tiny servant of the Almighty Absolute Godhead, realized through the unflinching mercy of my divine

master. Let me therefore bow down at his lotus feet with all the humility
at my command.
 

Looking

at the
Cultural
Background

 

 
India’s Greatest Impersonalist Meditated
on Lord Krsna and the Bhagavad-gita

Srila Prabhupada chastises impersonalist yogis and swamis, the nominal
followers of the ninth-century teacher Sankara, in this commentary on the latter’s Meditation on the Bhagavad-gita: ‘Fools rush in where angels fear to
tread. Whereas Sankara, the greatest of the impersonalists, offers his due
respects to Krsna and His book Bhagavad-gita, the foolish say that ‘we need
not surrender to the personal Krsna.’”’

_j|—

O Bhagavad-gita,

Through Thy eighteen chapters
Thou showerest upon man

The immortal nectar

Of the wisdom of the Absolute.

O blessed Gita,

By Thee, Lord Krsna Himself
Enlightened Arjuna.

Afterward, the ancient sage Vyasa
Included Thee in the Mahabharata.
O loving mother,

Destroyer of man’s rebirth

Into the darkness of this mortal world,
Upon Thee I meditate.

_)—

Salutations to thee, O Vyasa.

Thou art of mighty intellect,

And thine eyes

Are large as the petals

Of the full-blown lotus.

It was thou

Who brightened this lamp of wisdom,
Filling it with the oil

Of the Mahabharata.

82
Looking at the Cultural Background 83

PURPORT

Sripada Sankaracarya was an impersonalist from the materialistic point
of view. But he never denied the spiritual form known as sac-cid-adnandavigraha, or the eternal, all-blissful form of knowledge which existed
before the material creation. When he spoke of Supreme Brahman as impersonal, he meant that the Lord’s sac-cid-dnanda form was not to be
confused with a material conception of personality. In the very beginning
of his commentary on the Gitd, he maintains that Narayana, the Supreme
Lord, is transcendental to the material creation. The Lord existed before
the creation as the transcendental personality, and He has nothing to do
with material personality. Lord Krsna is the same Supreme Personality,
and He has no connection with a material body. He descends in His
spiritual, eternal form, but foolish people mistake His body to be like
ours. Sankara’s preaching of impersonalism is especially meant for teaching foolish persons who consider Krsna to be an ordinary man composed
of matter.

No one would care to read the Gita if it had been spoken by a material
man, and certainly Vydsadeva would not have bothered to incorporate it
mto the history of the Mahabharata. According to the above verses,
Mahabharata is the history of the ancient world, and Vydsadeva is the
writer of this great epic. The Bhagavad-gita is identical with Krsna; and
because Krsna is the Absolute Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is
no difference between Krsna and His words. Therefore the Bhagavad-gita
S$ aS worshipable as Lord Krsna Himself, both being absolute. One who
hears the Bhagavad-gitd ‘‘as is’’ actually hears the words directly from the
lotus lips of the Lord. But unfortunate persons say that the Gitd is too antiquated for the modern man, who wants to find out God by speculation
or meditation.

_3—

I salute Thee, O Krsna,

O Thou who art the refuge
Of ocean-born Laksmi
And all who take refuge
At Thy lotus feet.

Thou art indeed

The wish-fulfilling tree
For Thy devotee.
84 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Thy one hand holds a staff

For driving cows,

And Thy other hand is raised—

The thumb touching the tip

Of Thy forefinger,

Indicating divine knowledge.
Salutations to Thee, O Supreme Lord,
For Thou art the milker

Of the ambrosia of the Gita.

PURPORT

Sripada Sankaracarya explicitly says, ‘‘You fools, just worship Govinda
and that Bhagavad-gita spoken by Narayana Himself,’’ yet foolish people
still conduct their research work to find out Narayana; consequently they
are wretched, and they waste their time for nothing. Narayana is never
wretched nor daridra; rather, He is worshiped by the goddess of fortune,
Laksmi, as well as by all living entities. Sankara declared himself to be
‘*Brahman,’’ but he admits Narayana, or Krsna, to be the Supreme Personality who is beyond the material creation. He offers his respects to
Krsna as the Supreme Brahman, or Parabrahman, because He (Krsna) is
worshipable by everyone. Only the fools and enemies of Krsna, who cannot understand what the Bhagavad-gitd is (though they make commentaries on it), say, “Jt is not the personal Krsna to whom we have to surrender
ourselves utterly, but to the unborn, beginningless Eternal who speaks through
Krsna.” Fools rush in where angels fear to tread. Whereas Sankara, the
greatest of the impersonalists, offers his due respects to Krsna and His
book the Bhagavad-gita, the foolish say that ‘‘we need not surrender to
the personal Krsna.’’ Such unenlightened people do not know that Krsna
is absolute and that there is no difference between His inside and outside.
The difference of inside and outside is experienced in the dual, material
world. In the absolute world there is no such difference because in the absolute everything is spiritual (sac-cid-dnanda), and Narayana, or Krsna,
belongs to the absolute world. In the absolute world there is only the factual personality, and there is no distinction between body and soul.

—4—

The Upanisads
Are as a herd of cows,
Looking at the Cultural Background 85

Lord Krsna, son of a cowherd,
Is their milker,

Arjuna is the calf,

The supreme nectar of the Gita
Is the milk,

And the wise man

Of purified intellect

Is the drinker.

PURPORT

Unless one understands spiritual variegatedness, one cannot understand the transcendental pastimes of the Lord. In the Brahma-samhita
it is said that Krsna’s name, form, quality, pastimes, entourage, and
paraphernalia are all @nanda-cinmaya-rasa—in short, everything of His
transcendental association is of the same composition of spiritual bliss,
knowledge, and eternity. There is no end to His name, form, etc., unlike
in the material world, where all things have their end. As stated in the
Bhagavad-gita, only fools deride Him; whereas it is Sankara, the greatest
impersonalist, who worships Him, His cows, and His pastimes as the son
of Vasudeva and pleasure of Devakt.

—_5—

Thou son of Vasudeva,

Destroyer of the demons Kamsa and Canitra,
Thou supreme bliss of Mother Devaki,

O Thou, guru of the universe,

Teacher of the worlds,

Thee, O Krsna, I salute.

PURPORT

Sankara describes Him as the son of Vasudeva and Devaki. Does he
mean thereby that he is worshiping an ordinary material man? He worships Krsna because he knows that Krsna’s birth and activities are all
supernatural. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita [4.9], Krsna’s birth and activities are mysterious and transcendental, and therefore only the
devotees of Krsna can know them perfectly. Sankara was not such a fool
that he would accept Krsna as an ordinary man and at the same time offer
86 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Him all devotional obeisances, knowing Him as the son of Devaki and
Vasudeva. According to the Bhagavad-gita, only by knowing the transcendental birth and activities of Krsna can one attain liberation by
acquiring a spiritual form like Krsna’s. There are five different kinds of
liberation. One who merges into the spiritual auras of Krsna, known as
the impersonal Brahman effulgence, does not fully develop his spiritual
body. But one who fully develops his spiritual existence becomes an
associate of Narayana or Krsna in different spiritual abodes. One who enters into the abode of Narayana develops a spiritual form exactly like
Naradyana’s (four-handed), and one who enters into the highest spiritual
abode of Krsna, known as Goloka Vrndavana, develops a spiritual form
of two hands like Krsna’s. Sankara, as an incarnation of Lord Siva, knows
all these spiritual existences, but he did not disclose them to his then
Buddhist followers because it was impossible for them to know about the
spiritual world. Lord Buddha preached that void is the ultimate goal, so
how could his followers understand spiritual variegatedness? Therefore
Sankara said, brahma satyam jagan mithyda, or, material variegatedness is
false but spiritual variegatedness is fact. In the Padma Purana Lord Siva
has admitted that he had to preach the philosophy of ma@yd@, or illusion, in
the Kali-yuga as another edition of the “‘void’’ philosophy of Buddha. He
had to do this by the order of the Lord for specific reasons. He disclosed
his real mind, however, by recommending that people worship Krsna,
for no one can be saved simply by mental speculations composed of word
jugglery and grammatical manuevers. Sankara further instructs:

bhaja govindam bhaja govindam
bhaja govindam mtdha-mate
samprapte sannihite kale
na hi na hi raksati dukri-karane

**You intellectual fools, just worship Govinda, just worship Govinda, just
worship Govinda. Your grammatical knowledge and word jugglery will
not save you at the time of death.”’

—_6—

Of that terrifying river

Of the battlefield of Kuruksetra

Over which the Pandavas victoriously crossed,
Bhisma and Drona were as the high banks,
Looking at the Cultural Background 87

Jayadratha as the river’s water,

The King of Gandhara the blue water-lily,
Salya the shark, Krpa the current,

Karna the mighty waves,

Asvatthama and Vikarna the dread alligators,
And Duryodhana the very whirlpool—

But Thou, O Krsna, wast the ferryman!

_7—

May the spotless lotus of the Mahabharata
That grows on the waters

Of the words of Vyasa

And of which the Bhagavaa-gita

Is the irresistibly sweet fragrance

And its tales of heroes

The full-blown petals

Fully opened by the talk of Lord Hari,
Who destroys the sins

Of Kali-yuga,

And on which daily light

The nectar-seeking souls,

As so many bees

Swarming joyously —

May this lotus of the Mahdbharata
Bestow on us the highest good.

—3—

Salutations to Lord Krsna

The embodiment of supreme bliss,
By whose grace and compassion
The dumb become eloquent

And the lame scale mountains—
Him I salute!

PURPORT

Foolish followers of foolish speculators cannot understand the meaning of offering salutations to Lord Krsna, the embodiment of bliss.
88 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Sankara himself offered his salutations to Lord Krsna so that some of his
intelligent followers might understand the real fact by the example set by
their great master, Sankara, the incarnation of Lord Siva. But there are
many obstinate followers of Sankara who refuse to offer their salutations
to Lord Krsna, and instead mislead innocent persons by injecting
materialism into the Bhagavad-gita and confusing innocent readers by
their commentaries, and consequently the readers never have the opportunity to become blessed by offering salutations to Lord Krsna, the cause
of all causes. The greatest disservice to humanity is to keep mankind in
darkness about the science of Krsna, or Krsna consciousness, by distorting the sense of the Gita.

—9—

Salutations to that supreme shining one
Whom the creator Brahma, Varuna,

Indra, Rudra, Marut, and all divine beings
Praise with hymns,

Whose glories are sung

By the verses of the Vedas,

Of whom the singers of Sama sing

And of whose glories the Upanisads

Proclaim in full choir,

Whom the yogis see

With their minds absorbed

In perfect meditation,

And of whom all the hosts

Of gods and demons

Know not the limitations.

To Him, the Supreme God, Krsna, be all salutations—
Him we salute! Him we salute! Him we salute!

PURPORT

By recitation of the ninth verse of his meditation, quoted from the
Srimad-Bhagavatam, Sankara has indicated that Lord Krsna is worshipable by one and all, including himself. He gives hints to materialists,
impersonalists, mental speculators, ‘‘void’’ philosophers, and all other
candidates subjected to the punishment of material miseries —just offer
salutations to Lord Krsna, who is worshiped by Brahma, Siva, Varuna,
Looking at the Cultural Background 89

Indra, and all other demigods. He has not mentioned, however, the
name of Visnu because Visnu is identical with Krsna. The Vedas and the
Upanisads are meant for understanding the process by which one can surrender unto Krsna. The yogis try to see Him (Krsna) within themselves
by meditation. In other words, it is for all the demigods and demons who
do not know where the ultimate end is that Sankara teaches, and he
especially instructs the demons and the fools to offer salutations to Krsna
and His words, the Bhagavad-gita, by following in his footsteps. Only by
such acts will the demons be benefited, not by misleading their innocent
followers by so-called mental speculations or showbottle meditations.
Sankara directly offers salutations to Krsna, as if to show the fools, who
are searching after light, that here is light like the sun. But the fallen
demons are like owls that will not open their eyes on account of their fear
of the sunlight itself. These owls will never open their eyes to see the
sublime light of Krsna and His words the Bhagavad-gita. They will,
however, comment on the Gitd with their closed owl-eyes to mislead
their unfortunate readers and followers. Sankara, however, discloses the
hight to his less intelligent followers and shows that the Bhagavad-gita and
Krsna are the only source of light. This is all to teach the sincere seekers
of truth to offer salutation to Lord Krsna and thus surrender unto Him
without misgivings. That is the highest perfection of life, and that is the
fhighest teaching of Sankara, the great learned scholar whose teachings
drove the voidist philosophy of Buddha out of India, the land of
knowledge. Om tat sat.
The Krsna Consciousness Movement
Is the Genuine Vedic Way

After reading an article on the Krsna consciousness movement in the Los
Angeles Times (January 11, 1970), Srila Prabhupdda begins an unusual
correspondence with Dr. J. F. Staal, Professor of ee and of South
Asian Languages at the University of California, Berkeley. .

Excerpt From the Los Angeles Times Article

‘Dr. J.F. Staal, Professor of Philosophy and Near Eastern [sic]
Languages at UC Berkeley and an instructor in Indian philosophy,
believes that the Krsna sect is an authentic Indian religion and that its
adherents are sincere. He attributes the Society’s rapid increase in members to the tendency of today’s younger generation to reject organized
churchgoing while at the same time searching for fulfillment of a belief in
mysticism.

**He points out, however, that persons who turn away from Christianity, Muhammadanism, and Judaism have usually lost faith with the
personal god of those religions and are looking for a mystical religion
without absolutes.

** “These people in the Krsna movement have turned to Hinduism,
but, curiously, it is a cult that is highly personalistic,’ Staal said. “They accept a personal god, Krsna, and Christianity has that. I feel that they have
transferred some of their Christian background to a Hindu sect.’

‘*He also feels that they spend too much time chanting to develop a
philosophy. On these grounds he and others on the faculty turned down
the request to grant credit for an experimental course in Krsna consciousness which will be taught during the winter quarter by Hans Kary,
president of the sect’s Berkeley temple.”’

90
Looking at the Cultural Background 91

Srila Prabhupada’s Letter to the Los Angeles Times
January 14, 1970

Editor
Los Angeles Times

Dear Sir:

With reference to your article in the Los Angeles Times dated Sunday,
January 11, 1970, under the heading ‘‘Krsna Chant,’’ I beg to point out
that the Hindu religion is perfectly based on the personal conception of
God, or Visnu. The impersonal conception of God is a side issue, or one
of the three features of God. The Absolute Truth is ultimately the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Paramatma conception is the
localized aspect of His omnipresence, and the impersonal conception is
the aspect of His greatness and eternity. But all these combined together
make the Complete Whole.

Dr. J.F. Staal’s statement that the Krsna cult is a combination of Christian and Hindu religion, as if something manufactured by concoction, is
not correct. If Christian, Muhammadan, or Buddhist religions are personal, that is quite welcome. But the Krsna religion has been personal
from a time long, long ago when Christian, Muhammadan, and Buddhist
religions had not yet come into existence. According to the Vedic conception, religion is basically made by the personal God as His laws.
Religion cannot be manufactured by man or anyone except God superior
to man. Religion is the law of God only.

Unfortunately, all the swamis who came before me in this country
@ressed the impersonal aspect of God, without sufficient knowledge of
God’s personal aspect. In the Bhagavad-gita, therefore, it is said that only
less intelligent persons consider that God is originally impersonal but
assumes a form when He incarnates. The Krsna philosophy, however,
tased on the authority of the Vedas, is that originally the Absolute Truth
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His plenary expansion is present
m everyone’s heart in His localized aspect, and the impersonal Brahman
effulgence is the transcendental light and heat distributed everywhere.

In the Bhagavad-gita it is clearly said that the aim of the Vedic way of
searching out the Absolute Truth is to find the personal God. One who is
gatisfied only with the other aspects of the Absolute Truth, namely the
Paramatma feature or the Brahman feature, is to be considered possessed
of a poor fund of knowledge. Recently we have published our Sri
92 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

ISopanisad, a Vedic literature, and in this small booklet we have
thoroughly discussed this point.

As far as the Hindu religion is concerned, there are millions of Krsna
temples in India, and there is not a single Hindu who does not worship
Krsna. Therefore, this Krsna consciousness movement is not a concocted idea. We invite all scholars, philosophers, religionists, and members of the general public to understand this movement by critical study.
And if one does so seriously, one will understand the sublime position of
this great movement.

The chanting process is also authorized. Professor Staal’s feeling of
disgust in the matter of constant chanting of the holy name of Krsna is a
definite proof of his lack of knowledge in this authorized movement of
Krsna consciousness. Instead of turning down the request to give Kary’s
course credit, he and all other learned professors of the University of
California at Berkeley should patiently hear about the truth of this
authorized movement so much needed at present in godless society.
[Credit for the course was later established.] This is the only movement
which can save the confused younger generation. I shall invite all responsible guardians of this country to understand this transcendental movement and then give us all honest facilities to spread it for everyone’s
benefit.

A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Spiritual Master of the
Hare Krsna Movement

The Exchange Between Srila Prabhupada and Dr. Staal
January 23, 1970
Swami A. C. Bhaktivedanta

Dear Swamiji:

Thank you very much for sending me a copy of your letter to the Los
Angeles Times, now also published in the Daily Californian. | think you
will agree with me that apart from publicity, little is gained by discussing
religious or philosophic issues through interviews and letters in the
press; but allow me to make two brief observations.

First, I know that devotion to Krsna is old (though definitely not as old
as the Vedas) and has never been influenced by Christianity, Islam, or
Judaism (I never referred to Buddhism in this connection). The
Looking at the Cultural Background 93

differences between the personal and impersonal are relatively vague,
but adopting this distinction for simplicity, I expressed surprise at seeing
people who have grown up in a Western culture which stresses the personal take to an Indian cult which does the same. I am less surprised
when people who are dissatisfied with Western monotheism take to an
Indian philosophy which stresses an impersonal absolute.

Second, I never expressed nor felt disgust at the chanting of the name
of Krsna. I am not only not irritated at it (like some people), but I rather
like it. But it is an indisputable fact that the Bhagavad-gita (not to mention the Vedas) does not require such constant chanting. The Gitd deals
with quite different subjects, which I treat at some length in my courses
on the philosophies of India.

Thanking you,
Yours sincerely,
J.F. Staal
Professor of Philosophy
and of South Asian Languages

January 30, 1970

J.F. Staal
Professor of Philosophy
and of South Asian Languages
University of California
Berkeley, California

My dear Professor Staal:

I thank you very much for your kind letter dated January 23, 1970. In
the last paragraph of your letter you have mentioned that you are not irritated at the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra (like some people), but
rather like it. This has given me much satisfaction, and I am sending
herewith a copy of our magazine, Back to Godhead, issue number 28, in
which you will find how the students [at a program at Ohio State
University] liked this chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra, although all of
them were neophytes to this cult of chanting. Actually this chanting is
very pleasing to the heart and is the best means of infusing spiritual consciousness, or Krsna consciousness, into the hearts of people in general.

This is the easiest process of spiritual realization and is recommended
m the Vedas. In the Brhan-ndradiya Purana it is clearly stated that it is
94 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

only chanting of the holy name of Hari [Krsna] that can save people from
the problems of materialistic existence, and there is no other alternative,
no other alternative, no other alternative in this age of Kalli.

Western culture is monotheistic, but Westerners are being misled by
impersonal Indian speculation. The young people of the West are frustrated because they are not diligently taught about monotheism. They are
not satisfied with this process of teaching and understanding. The Krsna
consciousness movement is a boon to them because they are being really
trained to understand Western monotheism under the authoritative
Vedic system. We do not simply theoretically discuss; rather, we learn by
the prescribed method of Vedic regulations.

But I am surprised to see that in the last paragraph of your letter you
say, ‘‘It is an indisputable fact that the Bhagavad-gitad (not to mention the
Vedas) does not require such constant chanting.”’’ I think that you have
missed the following verse in the Bhagavad-gita, apart from many other
similar verses:

satatam kirtayanto mam
yatantas ca drdha-vratah
namasyantas ca mam bhaktya
nitya-yukta upasate
[Bhagavad-gita 9.14]

The engagement of the great souls, freed from delusion and perfect in
their realization of God, is described here: satatam kirtayanto mam—they
are always (satatam) chanting (kirtayantah) My glories and— nitya-yukta
upasate—always worshiping Me (Krsna).

So I do not know how you can say “‘indisputable.’’ And, if you want
references from the Vedas, I can give you many. In the Vedas, the chief
transcendental vibration omkara is also Krsna. Pranava omkara is the
divine substance of the Vedas. Following the Vedas means chanting the
Vedic mantras, and no Vedic mantra is complete without omkara. In the
Mandtikya Upanisad, omkara is stated to be the most auspicious sound
representation of the Supreme Lord. This is also confirmed again in the
Atharva Veda. Omkara is the sound representation of the Supreme Lord
and is therefore the principal word in the Vedas. In this connection, the
Supreme Lord, Krsna, says, pranavah sarva-vedesu: ‘*I am the syllable om
in all the Vedic mantras.”’ [Bg. 7.8]

Furthermore, in Bhagavad-gita, Chapter Fifteen, verse 15, Krsna says,
‘*T am seated in everyone’s heart. By all the Vedas, I am to be known; I
Looking at the Cultural Background 95

am the compiler of Veddnta, and I know Veda as it is.”’ The Supreme
Lord, seated in everyone’s heart, is described in both the Mundaka and
Svetasvatara Upanisads: dvd suparnd sayuja sakhayad... The Supreme
Lord and the individual soul are sitting in the body like two friendly birds
in a tree. One bird is eating the fruits of the tree, or reactions of material
activities, and the other bird, the Supersoul, is witnessing.

The goal of Vedantic study, therefore, is to know the Supreme Lord,
Krsna. This point is stressed in the Bhagavad-gita, Chapter Eight, verse
13, where it is stated that by the mystic yoga process, ultimately vibrating
the sacred syllable om, one attains to His supreme spiritual planet. In the
Vedanta-sutras, which you have certainly read, the Fourth Chapter,
adhikarana 4, stitra 22, states positively, andavrttih sabdat: ‘‘By sound
vibration one becomes liberated.’’ By devotional service, by understanding well the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can go to His abode
and never come back again to this material condition. How is it possible?
The answer is, simply by chanting His name constantly.

This is accepted by the exemplary disciple, Arjuna, who has perfectly
leamed the conclusion of spiritual science from the yogesvara, the master
of mystic knowledge, Krsna. Recognizing Krsna to be the Supreme Brahman, Arjuna addresses Him, sthdne hrsikesa...:°*The world becomes
joyful hearing Your name, and thus do all become attached to You.”’
(Bg. 11.36] The process of chanting is herein authorized as the direct
means of contacting the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of
Godhead. Simply by chanting the holy name Krsna, the soul is attracted
by the Supreme Person, Krsna, to go home, back to Godhead.

In the Narada-pancaratra it is stated that all the Vedic rituals, mantras,
and understanding are compressed into the eight words Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare. Similarly, in the Kali-santarana
Upanisad it is stated that these sixteen words, Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare, are especially meant for counteracting the degrading and contaminating influence of this materialistic age of Kali.

All these points are elaborately presented in my book Teachings of Lord
Caitanya.

The process of chanting is, therefore, not only the sublime method for
practical perfection of life, but the authorized Vedic principle inaugurated
by the greatest Vedic scholar and devotee, Lord Caitanya (whom we consider an incarnation of Krsna). We are simply following in His authorized
footsteps.

The scope of the Krsna consciousness movement is universal. The
96 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

process for regaining one’s original spiritual status of eternal life, full
with bliss and knowledge, is not abstract, dry theorizing. Spiritual life is
not described in the Vedas as theoretical, dry, or impersonal. The Vedas
aim at the inculcation of pure love of God only, and this harmonious conclusion is practically realized by the Krsna consciousness movement, or
by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra.

As the goal of spiritual realization is only one, love of God, so the
Vedas stand as a single comprehensive whole in the matter of transcendental understanding. Only the incomplete views of various parties apart
from the bona fide Vedic lines of teaching give a rupturous appearance to
the Bhagavad-gita. The reconciliative factor adjusting all apparently
diverse propositions of the Vedas is the essense of the Veda, or Krsna
consciousness (love of God).

Thanking you once again,

Yours sincerely,
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami

February 8, 1970
Swami A. C. Bhaktivedanta

Dear Swamiji:

Thank you very much for your kindness in sending me your long and
interesting letter of January 30, together with the last issue of Back to
Godhead. So far I have had a few discussions with members of your
society here, but they were not entirely satisfactory from my point of
view. But now I have your much more authoritative letter, whereby the
discussion moves to a higher level.

And yet, I am afraid, you have not convinced me that all the scriptures
you quote prescribe only chanting of the name of Krsna. Let me refer
only to the most important ones.

In the Bhagavad-gita [9.14], kirtayantah need not mean chanting of the
name of Krsna. It may mean glorifying, chanting, reciting, talking, and
refer to songs, hymns, descriptions, or conversations. The commentators
take it that way. Sankara in his commentary merely repeats the word, but
Anandagiri in his vyakhyd classes kirtanam as vedanta-Sravanam pranavajapas ca, ‘‘listening to the Vedanta and muttering om’’ (that the Vedic om
is Krsna is said in the Bhagavad-gita, where Krsna is also identified with
Looking at the Cultural Background 97

many other things, and which is smrti, but not in the Vedas, which are
sruti). Another commentator, Hanuman, in his Paisdca-bhdsya, says that
kirtayantah merely means bhdsmadnah—‘‘talking [about].”’

More important, I think, than the precise meaning of this word, is that
the entire verse does not require that everyone always engage in Kirtana,
but merely states that some great souls do so. This is obvious from the
next verse, which states that anye, ‘‘others,’’ engage in jfdnayajnena...yajanto mam, ‘‘worshiping me...with the worship of
knowledge.’’ The Bhagavad-gita is broad-minded and tolerant of a
variety of religious approaches, although it also stresses one aspect above
all others (i.e., sarva-phala-tydga) .*

Finally, in the last sutra of the Veddnta-stitra, anadvrttih sabdat...,
sabda refers to the scripture or to the revelation of the Vedas, as is clear
from the context and from the commentators. Sankara quotes a number
of texts (ending with ity ddi-sabdebhyah, ‘‘according to these sabdas’’) to
support this, 1.e., to support the statement that ‘‘according to the scripture there is no return.’’ He also refers to sabda in this sutra by saying
mantrartha-vadadi..., ‘‘mantras, descriptions, etc.’’ Vacaspati Misra in
the Bhadmati supports this and clarifies it further by adding that a contrary
view is Sruti-smrti-virodhah, “‘in conflict with the smrti and the sruti.’’

Thanking you once again for your kind attention.

Yours very sincerely,
J.F. Staal

February 15, 1970

J.F. Staal
Professor of Philosophy
and of South Asian Languages

My dear Dr. Staal:

I am very glad to receive your letter dated Sunday, February 8, 1970. I
am very much pleased also to note the contents.

Regarding convincing you that all scriptures prescribe chanting of the
name of Krsna, I can simply present the authority of Lord Caitanya.
Lord Caitanya recommended, kirtaniyah sada harih [‘‘Hari, Krsna, is

*Sarva-phala-tyaga means ‘‘renunciation of all the fruits of one’s work.”
98 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

constantly to be praised’? (Siksdstaka3)]. Similarly, Madhvacarya
quotes, vede rdmayane caiva harih sarvatra giyate {‘‘Hari is sung about
everywhere in the Vedas and Raémdyana’’). Similarly, in the Bhagavadgita [15.15] the Lord says, vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah [‘‘By all the
Vedas, 1 am to be known’’].

In this way we find all the scriptures aiming at the Supreme Person. In
the Rg Veda [1.22.20] the mantra is om tad visnoh paramam padam sada
pasyanti stirayah {‘‘The demigods are always looking to that supreme
abode of Visnu’’]. The whole Vedic process, therefore, is to understand
Lord Visnu, and any scripture is directly or indirectly chanting the glories
of the Supreme Lord, Visnu.

Regarding the Bhagavad-gita, verse 9.14, kirtayantah certainly means
glorifying, chanting, reciting, and talking, as you have said; but glorifying, chanting, or reciting about whom? It is certainly Krsna. The word
used in this connection is mdm [‘‘Me’’]. Therefore, we do not disagree when a person glorifies Krsna, as Sukadeva did in the SrimadBhagavatam. This is also kirtanam. The highest among all Vedic
literatures is the proper place for such glorification of the Supreme Lord,
Krsna, and this is to be well understood from the verse:

nigama-kalpataror galitam phalam
suka-mukhdad amrta-drava-samyutam

pibata bhagavatam rasam alayam
muhur aho rasika bhuvi bhavukah

‘““O expert and thoughtful men, relish Srimad-Bhdgavatam, the mature
fruit of the desire tree of Vedic literatures. It emanated from the lips of
Sti Sukadeva Goswami. Therefore this fruit has become even more
tasteful, although its nectarean juice was already relishable for all, including liberated souls.’’ [Srimad-Bhdgavatam 1.1.3]

It is said that Maharaja Pariksit attained salvation simply by hearing,
and similarly Sukadeva Goswami attained salvation simply by chanting.
In our devotional service there are nine different methods for achieving
the same goal, love of Godhead, and the first process is hearing. This
hearing process is called sruti. The next process is chanting. The chanting
process is smrti. We accept both sruti and smrti simultaneously. We consider sruti the mother and smrti the sister because a child hears from the
mother and then again learns from the sister by description.

Sruti and smrti are two parallel lines. Srila Rutpa Goswami therefore
says:
Looking at the Cultural Background 99

Sruti-smrti-puranadipancaratra-vidhim vina
aikantiki harer bhaktir
utpatayaiva Kalpate
[| Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.101]

That is, without references to sruti, smrti, Purdnas, and Pancaratras, unadulterated devotional service is never achieved. Therefore, anyone who
shows a devotional ecstasy without reference to the sdstras [Vedic scriptures] simply creates disturbances. On the other hand, if we simply stick
to the srutis, then we become veda-vdda-ratah,* who are not very much
appreciated in the Bhagavaa-gita.

Therefore Bhagavad-gita, although smrti, is the essence of all Vedic
scripture, sarvopanisado gavah.t It is just like a cow which is delivering
the milk, or the essence of all the Vedas and Upanisads, and all the
Gcadryas, including Sankaradcarya, accept the Bhagavad-gita as such.
Therefore you cannot deny the authority of the Bhagavad-gita because it
is smrti; that view is Sruti-smrti-virodhah, ‘‘in conflict with the smrti and
the sruti,’’ as you have correctly said.

Regarding Anandagiri’s quotation that kirtanam means veddnta-sravanam pranava-japas ca ({‘‘listening to the Vedanta and muttering om’’],
the knower of Vedanta is Krsna, and He is the compiler of Vedanta. He is
veda-vit and vedanta-krt. So where is there a greater opportunity for vedanta-sravanam than to hear it from Krsna?

Regarding the next verse, in which it is mentioned that jndanayajnena...yajanto mam, the object of worship is Krsna, as indicated by
mam [‘‘Me’’]. The process is described in the JSopanisad, mantra 11:

vidyam cavidyam ca yas
tad vedobhayam saha

avidyaya mrtyum tirtva
vidyayamrtam asnute

‘‘Only one who can learn the process of nescience and that of transcendental knowledge side by side can transcend the influence of repeated
birth and death and enjoy the full blessings of immortality.”’

*(Bg. 2.42] ‘‘Engaged in merely mouthing the words of the scriptures, but not understanding or practicing: them.”’
+See the fourth of Sankardcarya’s meditations (page 84 of this book).
100 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

The culture of vidya, or transcendental knowledge, is essential for the
human being, otherwise the culture of avidyd, or nescience, binds him to
conditional existence on the material platform. Materialistic existence
means the pursuit or culture of sense gratification, and this kind of
knowledge of sense gratification (avidya) means advancement of repeated birth and death. Those who are absorbed in such knowledge cannot learn any lesson from the laws of nature, and they do the same things
over repeatedly, being enamored of the beauty of illusory things. Vidya,
or factual knowledge, on the other hand, means to know thoroughly the
process of nescient activities while at the same time culturing transcendental science and thereby undeviatingly following the path of liberation.

Liberation is the enjoyment of the full blessings of immortality. This
immortality is enjoyed in the eternal kingdom of God (sambhity-amrtam
asnute), the region of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and is the
result obtained by worshiping the Supreme Lord, the cause of all causes,
sambhavat. So in this way real knowledge, vidya, means to worship the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna; that is jfdna-yajnena, the worship of knowledge.

This jidna-yajnena... yajanto mam is the perfection of knowledge, as
stated in the Bhagavad-gita [7.19]:

bahtinam janmanam ante
jnanavan mam prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatma sudurlabhah

**After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Me [Krsna], knowing Me to be the cause of all causes, and all
that is. Such a great soul is very rare.”’

If one has not yet come to this conclusion of knowledge and simply indulges in dry speculation without Krsna, then his hard speculative labor
is something like beating empty husks of grain. The unhulled rice and the
empty husks of rice look very much the same. One who knows how to get
the grain out of the unhulled rice is wise, but one who beats on the empty
husk, thinking to get some result, is simply wasting his labor uselessly.
Similarly, if one studies the Vedas without finding the goal of the Vedas,
Krsna, he simply wastes his valuable time.

So to cultivate knowledge for worshiping Krsna culminates after many,
many births and deaths when one actually becomes wise. When one
becomes wise in this way, he surrenders to Krsna, recognizing Him at
Looking at the Cultural Background 101

last to be the cause of all causes and all that is. That sort of great soul is
very rare. So those who have surrendered to Krsna life and soul are rare
sudurlabha mahatmas. They are not ordinary mahatmas.

By the grace of Lord Caitanya that highest perfectional status of life is
being distributed very freely. The effect is also very encouraging; otherwise, how are boys and girls without any background of Vedic culture
quickly occupying the posts of rare mahdatmas simply by vibrating this
transcendental sound, Hare Krsna? And simply on the basis of this
chanting, the majority of them (those who are very sincere) are steady in
devotional service and are not falling down to the four principles of
material sinful life, namely (1) meat eating, (2) illicit sexual connection,
(3) taking of intoxicants, including coffee, tea, and tobacco, and
(4) gambling. And that is the last sutra of the Vedanta-sutra, i.e., anavrttih
sabdat [‘‘By sound vibration one becomes liberated’’].

One has to learn by the result (phalena pariciyate). Our students are ordered to act like this, and they are not falling down. That they are remaining on the platform of pure spiritual life without hankering to culture the
above principles of avidyd, or sense gratification, is the test of their
proper understanding of the Vedas. They do not come back to the
material platform, because they are relishing the nectarean fruit of love
of God.

Sarva-phala-tyaga |‘‘renunciation of all the fruits of one’s work’’] is
explained in the Bhagavad-gita by the Lord Himself in the words sarvadharman parityajya mam ekam saranam vraja: “‘Give up everything and
simply surrender unto Me [Krsna].’’ The Hare Krsna mantra means ‘‘O
Supreme Energy of Krsna and O Lord Krsna, please engage me in Your
eternal service.’ So we have given up everything and are simply engaged
in the service of the Lord. What Krsna orders us to do is our only engagement. We have given up all resultant actions of karma, jndna, and yoga;
and that is the stage of pure devotional service, bhaktir uttama.

Yours sincerely,

A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
February 25, 1970
Swami A. C. Bhaktivedanta

Founder- Acdrya
International Society for Krishna Consciousness
102 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Dear Swamiji:

Thank you very much for your very interesting letter of February 15,
1970, with enclosure.

I am afraid that whenever you quote a passage purporting to show that
only the chanting of the name Krsna is required, I can quote another one
which requires something else, adding, yadi sloko ‘pi pramdadnam, ayam api
slokah pramanam bhavitum arhati: ‘‘If mere verses are authoritative, this
verse also ought to be regarded as authoritative.’’ And there may be no
end to this in the foreseeable future, as Patafijali also says, mahdn hi sabdasya prayoga-visayah: ‘‘For vast is the domain for the use of words.”’

Yours very sincerely,
J.F. Staal

3764 Watseka Avenue
Los Angeles, California 90034

April 24, 1970

Dear Dr. Staal:

I beg to thank you very much for your kind letter dated February 25,
1970. Iam sorry that I could not reply to your letter earlier because I was
a little busy in the matter of purchasing a new church estate at the above
address. We have secured a very nice place for a separate temple, lecture
room, my quarters, and the devotees’ residential quarters, all together in
a nice place with all the modern amenities.

I beg to request you to visit this place at your convenience, and if you
kindly let me know a day before, my students will be very glad to receive
you properly.

Regarding our correspondence, actually this quotation and counterquotation cannot solve the problem. In a court both the learned lawyers
quote from law books, but that is not the solution to the case. The determination of the case is the judgment of the presiding judge. So argument
cannot bring us to a conclusion.

The scriptural quotations are sometimes contradictory, and every
philosopher has a different opinion because without putting forward a
different thesis, no one can become a famous philosopher. It is therefore
difficult to arrive at the right conclusion. The conclusion is, as above
mentioned, to accept the judgment of authority. We follow the authority
Looking at the Cultural Background 103

of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is nondifferent from Krsna, and His
version according to Vedic scripture is that in this age this chanting is the
only solution for all problems of life. And that is actually being shown by
practical experience.

Recently there was a big procession of our students in Berkeley on the
Advent Day of Lord Caitanya, and the public has remarked as follows:
*‘This crowd of men is not like others, who assemble to break windows
and create havoc.’’ This is also confirmed by the police in the following
words: “‘Members of the Krsna consciousness movement cooperated
fully with the police, and their efforts to maintain peaceful order
throughout the parade were so successful that only minimal police involvement was required.’’

Similarly, in Detroit there was a big peace march, and our men were
appreciated as ‘‘angels’’ in the crowd. So this Krsna consciousness movement is actually needed at the present moment as the panacea for all
kinds of problems in human society.

Other quotations will not act very appreciably at this time. In a
drugstore there may be many medicines, and all may be genuine, but
what is required is that an experienced physician prescribe medicine fora
particular patient. We cannot say in this case, °‘This is also medicine, and
this is also medicine.’ No. The medicine which is effective for a particular person is the medicine for him—phalena pariciyate.

Yours very sincerely,
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami

Final Note by Srila Prabhupada

In a court of justice two lawyers put forward their respective relevant
arguments taken from the authorized law books to decide a point, but it
&S Up to the judge to decide the case in favor of one of the litigants. When
the opposing lawyers put forward their arguments, both of them are legal
and bona fide, but the judgment is given as to which argument is applicable to the particular case.

Lord Caitanya gives His judgment on the authority of sa@stras that the
chanting of the holy names of the Lord is the only means to elevate one
to the transcendental platform, and actually we can see it is effective.
Each and every one of our students who has seriously taken to this process may be examined individually, and any impartial judge will find it
104 , THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

easy to see that they have advanced in their transcendental realization
further than any philosophers, religionists, yogis, karmis, etc.

We have to accept everything favorable to the circumstances. Rejection of other methods in a particular circumstance does not mean that the
rejected ones are not bona fide. But for the time being, taking into consideration the age, time, and object, methods are sometimes rejected
even though bona fide. We have to test everything by its practical result.
By such a test, in this age the constant chanting of the Hare Krsna mahamantra undoubtedly proves very effective.

A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Krsna Consciousness:
Hindu Cult or Divine Culture?

Indians both inside and outside of India think that we are preaching the Hindu religion, but actually we are not... . People should not think
that we are preaching a sectarian religion. No. We are simply preaching how
to love God.... We are giving a spiritual culture that can solve all the problems of life, and therefore it is being accepted all over the world.”’

There is a misconception that the Krsna consciousness movement
represents the Hindu religion. In fact, however, Krsna consciousness is
in no way a faith or religion that seeks to defeat other faiths or religions.
Rather, it is an essential cultural movement for the entire human society
and does not consider any particular sectarian faith. This cultural movement is especially meant to educate people in how they can love God.

Sometimes Indians both inside and outside of India think that we are
preaching the Hindu religion, but actually we are not. One will not find
the word ‘‘Hindu”’ in the Bhagavad-gita. Indeed, there is no such word as
*“‘Hindu’’ in the entire Vedic literature. This word has been introduced by
the Muslims from provinces next to India, such as Afghanistan,
Baluchistan, and Persia. There is a river called Sindhu bordering the
north-western provinces of India, and since the Muslims there could not
pronounce Sindhu properly, they instead called the river ‘‘Hindu,’’ and
the inhabitants of this tract of land they called ‘‘Hindus.’’ In India, according to the Vedic language, the Europeans are called mlecchas or
pavanas. Similarly, ‘‘Hindu’’ is a name given by the Muslims.

India’s actual culture is described in the Bhagavad-gita, where it is
stated that according to the different qualities or modes of nature there
are different types of men, who are generally classified into four social orders and four spiritual orders. This system of social and spiritual division
ms known as varnasrama-dharma. The four varnas, or social orders, are
brahnana, ksatriya, vaisya, and Sstidra. The four ashrams, or spiritual orders, are brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprastha, and sannyasa. The varmasrama system is described in the Vedic scriptures known as the

105
106 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Purdnas. The goal of this institution of Vedic culture is to educate every
man for advancement in knowledge of Krsna, or God. That is the entire
Vedic program.

When Lord Caitanya talked with the great devotee Ramananda Raya,
the Lord asked him, °“‘What is the basic principle of human life?’’ Ramananda Raya answered that human civilization begins when varndsramadharma is accepted. Before coming to the standard of varndsrama-dharma
there is no question of human civilization. Therefore, the Krsna consciousness movement is trying to establish this right system of
human civilization, which is known as Krsna consciousness, or daivavarnasrama—divine culture.

In India, the varndsrama system has now been taken in a perverted
way, and thus a man born in the family of a brdhmana (the highest social
order) claims that he should be accepted as a brdhmana. But this claim is
not accepted by the sdstra (scripture). One’s forefather may have been a
brahmana according to gotra, or the family hereditary order, but real varnasrama-dharma is based on the factual quality one has attained, regardless of birth or heredity. Therefore, we are not preaching the present-day
system of the Hindus, especially those who are under the influence of
Sankaracarya, for Sankaracarya taught that the Absolute Truth is impersonal, and thus he indirectly denied the existence of God.

Sankaradcarya’s mission was special; he appeared to reestablish the
Vedic influence after the influence of Buddhism. Because Buddhism was
patronized by Emperor Asoka, twenty-six hundred years ago the Buddhist religion practically pervaded all of India. According to the Vedic
literature, Buddha was an incarnation of Krsna who had a special power
and who appeared for a special purpose. His system of thought, or faith,
was accepted widely, but Buddha rejected the authority of the Vedas.
While Buddhism was spreading, the Vedic culture was stopped both in
India and in other places. Therefore, since Sankaracarya’s only aim was
to drive away Buddha’s system of philosophy, he introduced a system
called Mayavada.

Strictly speaking, Mayavada philosophy is atheism, for it is a process in
which one imagines that there is God. This Mayavada system of philosophy has been existing since time immemorial. The present Indian
system of religion or culture is based on the Mayavada philosophy of
Sankaracarya, which is a compromise with Buddhist philosophy. According to Mayavada philosophy there actually is no God, or if God exists, He
is impersonal and all-pervading and can therefore be imagined in any
form. This conclusion is not in accord with the Vedic literature. That
Looking at the Cultural Background 107

literature names many demigods, who are worshiped for different purposes, but in every case the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead,
Visnu, is accepted as the supreme controller. That is real Vedic culture.

The philosophy of Krsna consciousness does not deny the existence of
God and the demigods, but Mayavada philosophy denies both; it maintains that neither the demigods nor God exists. For the Mayavadis,
ultimately all is zero. They say that one may imagine any authority—
whether Visnu, Durga, Lord Siva, or the sun-god—because these are the
demigods generally worshiped in society. But the Mayavada philosophy
does not in fact accept the existence of any of them. The Mayavadis say that because one cannot concentrate one’s mind on the impersonal Brahman, one may imagine any of these forms. This is a new
system, called paficopdsand. It was introduced by Sankaracarya, but the
Bhagavad-gita does not teach any such doctrines, and therefore they are
not authoritative.

The Bhagavad-gita accepts the existence of the demigods. The
demigods are described in the Vedas, and one cannot deny their existence, but they are not to be understood or worshiped according to the
way of Sankardcarya. The worship of demigods is rejected in the
Bhagavad-gita. The Gita [7.20] clearly states:

kamais tais tair hrta-jianah
prapadyante ‘nya-devatah

tam tam niyamam asthaya
prakrtya niyatah svaya

‘*Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto
demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship according to their own natures.’’ Furthermore, in the Bhagavad-gita [2.44],
Lord Krsna states:

bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam
tayapahrta-cetasam

vyavasayatmika buddhih
samadhau na vidhiyate

‘In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and
material opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolute
determination for devotional service does not take place.’’ Those who
are pursuing the various demigods have been described as hArta-jnanah,
108 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

which means ‘‘those who have lost their sense.’’ That is also further explained in the Bhagavada-gita [7.23]:

antavat tu phalam tesam
tad bhavaty alpa-medhasam
devan deva-yajo yanti
mad-bhakta yanti mam api

**Men of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are
limited and temporary. Those who worship the demigods go to the
planets of the demigods, but My devotees reach My supreme abode.”’
The rewards given by the demigods are temporary because any material
facility must act in connection with the temporary body. Whatever
material facilities one gets, whether by modern scientific methods or by
deriving benedictions from the demigods, will be finished with the body.
But spiritual advancement will never be finished.

People should not think that we are preaching a sectarian religion. No.
We are simply preaching how to love God. There are many theories
about the existence of God. The atheist, for example, will never believe
in God. Atheists like Professor Jacques Monod, who won the Nobel
Prize, declare that everything is chance (a theory already put forward
long ago by atheistic philosophers of India such as Carvaka). Then other
philosophies, such as the karma-mimamsa philosophy, accept that if one
goes on doing his work nicely and honestly, automatically the result will
come, without need for one to refer to God. For evidence, the proponents of such theories cite the argument that if one is diseased with an infection and takes medicine to counteract it, the disease will be
neutralized. But our argument in this connection is that even if one gives
a man the best medicine, he still may die. The results are not always predictable. Therefore, there is a higher authority, daiva-netrena, a supreme
director. Otherwise, how is it that the son of a rich and pious man
becomes a hippie in the street or that a man who works very hard and
becomes rich is told by his doctor, °"Now you may not eat any food, but
only barley water’’?

The karma-mimamsa theory holds that the world is going on without
the supreme direction of God. Such philosophies say that everything
takes place by lust (ka@ma-haitukam). By lust a man becomes attracted to
a woman, and by chance there is sex, and the woman becomes pregnant.
There is actually no plan to make the woman pregnant, but by a natural
Sequence when a man and a woman unite, a result is produced. The
Looking at the Cultural Background 109

atheistic theory, which is described in the Sixteenth Chapter of the
Bhagavad-gita as asuric, or demonic, 1s that actually everything is going
on in this way, because of chance and resulting from natural attraction.
This demonic theory supports the idea that if one wants to avoid
children, he may use a contraceptive method.

Actually, however, there is a great plan for everything—the Vedic
plan. The Vedic literature gives directions regarding how men and
women should unite, how they should beget children, and what the purpose of sex life is. Krsna says in the Bhagavad-gita that sex life sanctioned
by the Vedic order, or sex life under the direction of the Vedic rules and
regulations, is bona fide and is acceptable to Him. But chance sex life is
not acceptable. If by chance one is sexually attracted and there are
children, they are called varna-sankara, unwanted population. That is the
way of the lower animals; it is not acceptable for humans. For humans,
there is a plan. We cannot accept the theory that there is no plan for
human life or that everything is born of chance and material necessity.

Sankaracarya’s theory that there is no God and that one can go on with
his work and imagine God in any form just to keep peace and tranquillity
in society is also more or less based on this idea of chance and necessity.
Our way, however, which is completely different, is based on authority. It
is this divine varnasrama-dharma that Krsna recommends, not the caste
system as it is understood today. This modern caste system is now condemned in India also, and it should be condemned, for the classification
of different types of men according to birth is not the Vedic or divine
caste system.

There are many classes of men in society—some men are engineers,
some are medical practitioners, some are chemists, tradesmen, businessmen, and so on. These varieties of classes are not to be determined by
birth, however, but by quality. No such thing as the caste-by-birth
system is sanctioned by the Vedic literature, nor do we accept it. We have
nothing to do with the caste system, which is also at present being rejected by the public in India. Rather, we give everyone the chance to
become a brdhmana and thus attain the highest status of life.

Because at the present moment there is a scarcity of bradhmanas,
Spiritual guides, and ksatriyas, administrative men, and because the entire world is being ruled by stédras, or men of the manual laborer class,
there are many discrepancies in society. It is to mitigate all these discrepancies that we have taken to this Krsna consciousness movement. If the
brahmana class is actually reestablished, the other orders of social wellbeing will automatically follow, just as when the brain is perfectly in
110 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

order, the other parts of the body, such as the arms, the belly, and the
legs, all act very nicely.

The ultimate goal of this movement is to educate people in how to love
God. Caitanya Mahaprabhu approves the conclusion that the highest perfection of human life is to learn how to love God. The Krsna consciousness movement has nothing to do with the Hindu religion or any system
of religion. No Christian gentleman will be interested in changing his
faith from Christian to Hindu. Similarly, no Hindu gentleman of culture
will be ready to change to the Christian faith. Such changing is for men
who have no particular social status. But everyone will be interested in
understanding the philosophy and science of God and taking it seriously.
One should clearly understand that the Krsna consciousness movement
is not preaching the so-called Hindu religion. We are giving a spiritual
culture that can solve all the problems of life, and therefore it is being accepted all over the world.
TY.
Understanding
Krsna

and Christ
Krsna or Christ—
The Name Is the Same

It is 1974. Near ISKCON’s center in Frankfurt am Main, West Germany,
Srila Prabhupdda and several of his disciples take a morning walk with Father
Emmanuel Jungclaussen, a Benedictine monk from Niederalteich Monastery.
Noticing that Srila Prabhupdda is carrying meditation beads similar to the rosary, Father Emmanuel explains that he also chants a constant prayer: “Lord
Jesus Christ, be merciful unto us.” The following conversation ensues:

Srila Prabhupada: What is the meaning of the word Christ?

Father Emmanuel: Christ comes from the Greek word Christos, meaning
‘‘the anointed one.”’

Srila Prabhupada: Christos is the Greek version of the word Krsna.
Father Emmanuel: This is very interesting.

Srila Prabhupada: When an Indian person calls on Krsna, he often says,
‘*Krsta.’’ Krsta is a Sanskrit word meaning “‘attraction.’’ So when we address God as ‘“‘Christ,’’ ‘‘Krsta,’’ or ‘‘Krsna,’’ we indicate the same allattractive Supreme Personality of Godhead. When Jesus said, ‘‘Our
Father, who art in heaven, sanctified be Thy name,’’ that name of God
was ‘‘Krsta’’ or ‘‘Krsna.’’ Do you agree?

Father Emmanuel: | think Jesus, as the son of God, has revealed to us
the actual name of God: Christ. We can call God ‘‘Father,’’ but if we
want to address Him by His actual name, we have to say ‘‘Christ.”’
Srila Prabhupada: Yes. ‘‘Christ”’ is another way of saying Krsta, and
‘*Krsta’’ is another way of pronouncing Krsna, the name of God. Jesus
said that one should glorify the name of God, but yesterday I heard one
theologian say that God has no name—that we can call Him only
‘*Father.’’ A son may call his father ‘‘Father,’’ but the father also has a
specific name. Similarly, ‘“God”’ is the general name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose specific name is Krsna. Therefore whether
you call God ‘‘Christ,’’ “‘Krsta,’’ or ‘“‘Krsna,’’ ultimately you are addressing the same Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Father Emmanuel: Yes, if we speak of God’s actual name, then we must
say, ‘‘Christos.’’ In our religion, we have the Trinity: the Father, Son,

112
 

Understanding Krsna and Christ 113

and the Holy Spirit. We believe we can know the name of God only by
revelation from the Son of God. Jesus Christ revealed the name of the
father, and therefore we take the name Christ as the revealed name of
God.

Srila Prabhupada: Actually, it doesn’t matter— Krsna or Christ—the
name is the same. The main point is to follow the injunctions of the Vedic
scriptures that recommend chanting the name of God in this age. The
easiest way is to chant the maha-mantra: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
Rama and Krsna are names of God, and Hare is the energy of God. So
when we chant the mahda-mantra, we address God together with His
energy. This energy is of two kinds, the spiritual and the material. At
present we are in the clutches of the material energy. Therefore we pray
to Krsna that He may kindly deliver us from the service of the material
energy and accept us into the service of the spiritual energy. That is our
whole philosophy. Hare Krsna means, °“‘O energy of God, O God
[Krsna], please engage me in Your service.’ It is our nature to render
service. Somehow or other we have come to the service of material
things, but when this service is transformed into the service of the
Spiritual energy, then our life is perfect. To practice bhakti-yoga [loving
service to God] means to become free from designations like ‘‘Hindu,”’
‘*Muslim,”’ ‘Christian,’ this or that, and simply to serve God. We have
created Christian, Hindu, and Muhammadan religions, but when we
come to a religion without designations, in which we don’t think we are
Hindus or Christians or Muhammadans, then we can speak of pure
religion, or bhakti.

Father Emmanuel: Mukti? .
Srila Prabhupada: No, bhakti. When we speak of bhakti, mukti [liberation from material miseries] is included. Without bhakti there is no
mukti, but if we act on the platform of bhakti, then muktiis included. We —
learn this from the Bhagavaa-gita [14.26]:

mam ca yo ‘vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate

sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhiyaya kalpate

‘‘One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down
under any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature
and thus comes to the level of Brahman.”’
114 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Father Emmanuel: Is Brahman Krsna?

Srila Prabhupada: Krsna is Parabrahman. Brahman is realized in three
aspects: as impersonal Brahman, as localized Paramatma, and as personal
Brahman. Krsna is personal, and He is the Supreme Brahman, for
God is ultimately a person. In the Srimad-Bhdgavatam [1.2.11], this is
confirmed:

vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvam yaj-jnanam advayam
brahmeti paramatmeti
bhagavan iti sabdyate

**Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual substance Brahman, Paramatma, or Bhagavan.’’ The feature of the
Supreme Personality is the ultimate realization of God. He has all six
opulences in full: He is the strongest, the richest, the most beautiful, the
most famous, the wisest, and the most renounced.

Father Emmanuel: Yes, | agree.

Srila Prabhupada: Because God is absolute, His name, His form, and
His qualities are also absolute, and they are nondifferent from Him.
Therefore to chant God’s holy name means to associate directly with
Him. When one associates with God, one acquires godly qualities, and
when one is completely purified, one becomes an associate of the
Supreme Lord.

Father Emmanuel: But our understanding of the name of God is
limited.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, we are limited, but God is unlimited. And
because He is unlimited, or absolute, He has unlimited names, each of
which isGod. We can understand His names as much as our spiritual understanding is developed.

Father Emmanuel: May I ask a question? We Christians also preach love
of God, and we try to realize love of God and render service to Him with
all our heart and all our soul. Now, what is the difference between your
movement and ours? Why do you send your disciples to the Western
countries to preach love of God when the gospel of Jesus Christ is propounding the same message? ;
Srila Prabhupada: The problem is that the Christians do not follow the
commandments of God. Do you agree?

Father Emmanuel: Yes, to a large extent you’re right.

Srila Prabhupada: Then what is the meaning of the Christians’ love for
Understanding Krsna and Christ 115

God? If you do not follow the orders of God, then where is your love?
Therefore we have come to teach what it means to love God: if you love
Him, you cannot be disobedient to His orders. And if you’re disobedient,
your love is not true.

All over the world, people love not God but their dogs. The Krsna consciousness movement is therefore necessary to teach people how to
revive their forgotten love for God. Not only the Christians, but also the
Hindus, the Muhammadans, and all others are guilty. They have rubberStamped themselves ‘Christian,’ ‘‘Hindu,’’ or ‘‘Muhammadan,”’’ but
they do not obey God. That is the problem.

Visitor: Can you say in what way the Christians are disobedient?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. The first point is that they violate the commandment ‘‘Thou shalt not kill’? by maintaining slaughterhouses. Do you
agree that this commandment is being violated?

Father Emmanuel: Personally, I agree.

Srila Prabhupada: Good. So if the Christians want to love God, they
must stop killing animals.

Father Emmanuel: But isn’t the most important point...

Srila Prabhupada: If you miss one point, there is a mistake in your
calculation. Regardless of what you add or subtract after that, the mistake
is already in the calculation, and everything that follows will also be
faulty. We cannot simply accept that part of the scripture we like, and reject what we don’t like, and still expect to get the result. For example, a
hen lays eggs with its back part and eats with its beak. A farmer may consider, ‘“The front part of the hen is very expensive because I have to feed
it. Better to cut if off.’’ But if the head is missing there will be no eggs
anymore because the body is dead. Similarly, if we reject the difficult part
of the scriptures and obey the part we like, such an interpretation will not
help us. We have to accept all the injunctions of the scripture as they are
given, not only those that suit us. If you do not follow the first order,
*‘Thou shalt not kill,’’ then where is the question of love of God?
Visitor: Christians take this commandment to be applicable to human
beings, not to animals.

Srila Prabhupada: That would mean that Christ was not intelligent
enough to use the right word: murder. There is killing, and there is
murder. Murder refers to human beings. Do you think Jesus was not intelligent enough to use the right word— murder—instead of the word killing? Killing means any kind of killing, and especially animal killing. If
Jesus had meant simply the killing of humans, he would have used the
word murder.
116 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Father Emmanuel: But in the Old Testament the commandment “*Thou
Shalt not kill’? does refer to murder. And when Jesus said, ‘“Thou shalt
not kill,’’ he extended this commandment to mean that a human being
should not only refrain from killing another human being, but should
also treat him with love. He never spoke about man’s relationship with
other living entities, but only about his relationship with other human
beings. When he said, °‘Thou shalt not kill,’’ he also meant in the mental
and emotional sense—that you should not insult anyone or hurt him,
treat him badly, and so on.

Srila Prabhupada: We are not concerned with this or that testament but
only with the words used in the commandments. If you want to interpret
these words, that is something else. We understand the direct meaning.
‘Thou shalt not kill’? means, ‘“The Christians should not kill.’ You may
put forth interpretations in order to continue the present way of action,
but we understand very clearly that there is no need for interpretation.
Interpretation is necessary if things are not clear. But here the meaning is
clear. ‘“Thou shalt not kill’’ is a clear instruction. Why should we interpret it?

Father Emmanuel: Isn’t the eating of plants also killing?

Srila Prabhupada: The Vaisnava philosophy teaches that we should not
even kill plants unnecessarily. In the Bhagavad-gita [9.26] Krsna says:

patram puspam phalam toyam
yo me bhaktya prayacchati

tad aham bhakty-upahrtam
asnami prayatatmanah

‘‘If someone offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, a fruit, or
a little water, I will accept it.’” We offer Krsna only the kind of food He
demands, and then we eat the remnants. If offering vegetarian food to
Krsna were sinful, then it would be Krsna’s sin, not ours. But God is
apdapa-viddha—sinful reactions are not applicable to Him. He is like the
sun, which is so powerful that it can purify even urine—something impossible for us to do. Krsna is also like a king, who may order a murderer
to be hanged but who himself is beyond punishment because he is very
powerful. Eating food first offered to the Lord is also something like a
soldier’s killing during wartime. In a war, when the commander orders a
man to attack, the obedient soldier who kills the enemy will get a medal.
But if the same soldier kills someone on his own, he will be punished.
Similarly, when we eat only prasdda [the remnants of food offered to
Understanding Krsna and Christ 117

Krsna], we do not commit any sin. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita
[3.13]:

yajna-sistasinah santo
mucyante sarva-kilbisaih

bhunjate te tv agham papa
ye pacanty atma-karanat

“‘The devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because
they eat food that is first offered for sacrifice. Others, who prepare food
for personal sense enjoyment, verily eat only sin.”’

Father Emmanuel: Krsna cannot give permission to eat animals?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes—in the animal kingdom. But the civilized human
being, the religious human being, is not meant to kill and eat animals. If
you stop killing animals and chant the holy name Christ, everything will
be perfect. I have not come to teach you, but only to request you to
please chant the name of God. The Bible also demands this of you. So
let’s kindly cooperate and chant, and if you have a prejudice against
chanting the name Krsna, then chant “‘Christos’’ or ‘“Krsta’’—there is
no difference. Sri Caitanya said: ndmndm akari bahudha nija-sarva-saktih.
““God has millions and millions of names, and because there is no difference between God’s name and Himself, each one of these names has
the same potency as God.’’ Therefore, even if you accept designations
like ‘“Hindu,”’ “‘Christian,’’ or ‘‘Muhammadan,”’ if you simply chant the
name of God found in your own scriptures, you will attain the spiritual
platform. Human life is meant for self-realization—to learn how to love
God. That is the actual beauty of man. Whether you discharge this duty
as a Hindu, a Christian, or a Muhammadan, it doesn’t matter—but discharge it!

Father Emmanuel: | agree.

Srila Prabhupada [pointing to a string of 108 meditation beads]: We always have these beads, just as you have your rosary. You are chanting,
but why don’t the other Christians also chant? Why should they miss this
opportunity as human beings? Cats and dogs cannot chant, but we can
because we have a human tongue. If we chant the holy names of God, we
cannot lose anything; on the contrary, we gain greatly. My disciples practice chanting Hare Krsna constantly. They could also go to the cinema, or
do so many other things, but they have given everything up. They eat
neither fish nor meat nor eggs, they don’t take intoxicants, they don’t
drink, they don’t smoke, they don’t partake in gambling, they don’t
118 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

speculate, and they don’t maintain illicit sexual connections. But they do
chant the holy name of God. If you would like to cooperate with us, then
go to the churches and chant, ‘“‘Christ,’’ “‘Krsta,’’ or ‘““Krsna.’’ What
could be the objection?

Father Emmanuel: There is none. For my part, I would be glad to join
you.

Srila Prabhupada: No, we are speaking with you as a representative of
the Christian Church. Instead of keeping the churches closed, why not
give them to us? We would chant the holy name of God there twentyfour hours a day. In many places we have bought churches that were
practically closed because no one was going there. In London I saw
hundreds of churches that were closed or used for mundane purposes.
We bought one such church in Los Angeles. It was sold because no one
came there, but if you visit this same church today, you will see thousands of people. Any intelligent person can understand what God is in
five minutes; it doesn’t require five hours.

Father Emmanuel: [ understand.

Srila Prabhupada: But the people do not. Their disease is that they don’t
want to understand.

Visitor: I think understanding God is not a question of intelligence, but a
question of humility.

Srila Prabhupada: Humility means intelligence. The humble and meek
own the kingdom of God. This is stated in the Bible, is it not? But the
philosophy of the rascals is that everyone is God, and today this idea has
become popular. Therefore no one is humble and meek. If everyone
thinks that he is God, why should he be humble and meek? Therefore I
teach my disciples how to become humble and meek. They always offer
their respectful obeisances in the temple and to the spiritual master, and
in this way they make advancement. The qualities of humbleness and
meekness lead very quickly to spiritual realization. In the Vedic scriptures it is said, ‘“To those who have firm faith in God and the spiritual
master, who is His representative, the meaning of the Vedic scriptures is
revealed.”

Father Emmanuel: But shouldn’t this humility be offered to everyone
else, also? :

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, but there are two kinds of respect: special and
ordinary. Sri Krsna Caitanya taught that we shouldn’t expect honor for
ourselves, but should always respect everyone else, even if he is disrespectful to us. But special respect should be given to God and His pure
devotee.
Understanding Krsna and Christ 119

Father Emmanuel: Yes, I agree.

Srila Prabhupada: I think the Christian priests should cooperate with
the Krsna consciousness movement. They should chant the name Christ
or Christos and should stop condoning the slaughter of animals. This
program follows the teachings of the Bible; it is not my philosophy.
Please act accordingly and you will see how the world situation will
change. ,

Father Emmanuel: I thank you very much.

Srila Prabhupada: Hare Krsna.
Christ, Christians, and Krsna

“A Vaisnava [a pure devotee of the Lord] is unhappy to see the suffering of
others. Therefore, Lord Jesus Christ agreed to be crucified—to free others
from their suffering. But his followers are so unfaithful that they have decided,
‘Let Christ suffer for us, and we'll go on committing sin.’ They love Christ so
much that they think, ‘My dear Christ, we are very weak. We cannot give up
our sinful activities. So you please suffer for us....”’

The Srimad-Bhagavatam states that any bona fide preacher of God consciousness must have the qualities of titiksd (tolerance) and karund
(compassion). In the character of Lord Jesus Christ we find both these
qualities. He was so tolerant that even while he was being crucified, he
didn’t condemn anyone. And he was so compassionate that he prayed to
God to forgive the very persons who were trying to kill him. (Of course,
they could not actually kill him. But they were thinking that he could be
killed, so they were committing a great offense.) As Christ was being crucified he prayed, ‘‘Father, forgive them. They know not what they are
doing.”

A preacher of God consciousness is a friend to all living beings. Lord
Jesus Christ exemplified this by teaching, ‘“Thou shalt not kill.’’ But the
Christians like to misinterpret this instruction. They think the animals
have no soul, and therefore they think they can freely kill billions of innocent animals in the slaughterhouses. So although there are many persons who profess to be Christians, it would be very difficult to find one
who strictly follows the instructions of Lord Jesus Christ.

A Vaisnava is unhappy to see the suffering of others. Therefore, Lord
Jesus Christ agreed to be crucified—to free others from their suffering.
But his followers are so unfaithful that they have decided, ‘‘Let Christ
suffer for us, and we’ll go on committing sin.’’ They love Christ so much
that they think, ‘“‘My dear Christ, we are very weak. We cannot give up
our sinful activities. So you please suffer for us.”’

Jesus Christ taught, ‘“Thou shalt not kill.’’ But his followers have now
decided, ‘‘Let us kill anyway,’’ and they open big, modern, scientific

120
Understanding Krsna and Christ 121

slaughterhouses. ‘‘If there is any sin, Christ will suffer for us.’’ This is a
most abominable conclusion.

Christ can take the sufferings for the previous sins of his devotees. But
first they have to be sane: ‘‘Why should I put Jesus Christ into suffering
for my sins? Let me stop my sinful activities.’’

Suppose a man—the favorite son of his father—commits a murder.
And suppose he thinks, “‘If there is any punishment coming, my father
can suffer for me.’’ Will the law allow it? When the murderer is arrested
and says, ‘“No, no. You can release me and arrest my father; I am his pet
son,”’ will the police officials comply with that fool’s request? He committed the murder, but he thinks his father should suffer the punishment!
Is that a sane proposal? ‘‘No. You have committed the murder; you must
be hanged.’’ Similarly, when you commit sinful activities, you must
suffer—not Jesus Christ. This is God’s law.

Jesus Christ was such a great personality—the son of God, the representative of God. He had no fault. Still, he was crucified. He wanted to
deliver God consciousness, but in return they crucified him—they were
so thankless. They could not appreciate his preaching. But we appreciate
him and give him all honor as the representative of God.

Of course, the message that Christ preached was just according to his
particular time, place, and country, and just suited for a particular group
of people. But certainly he is the representative of God. Therefore we
adore Lord Jesus Christ and offer our obeisances to him.

Once, in Melbourne, a group of Christian ministers came to visit me.
They asked, ‘‘What is your idea of Jesus Christ?’’ I told them, ‘‘He is our
guru. He is preaching God consciousness, so he is our spiritual master.”’
The ministers very much appreciated that.

Actually, anyone who is preaching God’s glories must be accepted as a
guru. Jesus Christ is one such great personality. We should not think of
him as an ordinary human being. The scriptures say that anyone who
considers the spiritual master to be an ordinary man has a hellish mentality. If Jesus Christ were an ordinary man, then he could not have
delivered God consciousness.
Thou Shalt Not Kall

At ISKCON’s Paris center Srila: Prabhupdada talks with Cardinal Jean
Danieélou: “the Bible does not simply say, ‘Do not kill the human being.’ It
says broadly, ‘Thou shalt not kill.’. .. Why do you interpret this to suit your
own convenience? ... When there is no food, someone may eat meat in order
to keep from starving. That is another thing. But it is most sinful to regularly
maintain slaughterhouses just to satisfy your tongue.”

Srila Prabhupada: Jesus Christ said, ‘‘Thou shalt not kill.’’ So why is it
that the Christian people are engaged in animal killing?

Cardinal Danieélou: Certainly in Christianity it is forbidden to kill, but
we believe that there is a difference between the life of a human being
and the life of the beasts. The life of a human being is sacred because
man is made in the image of God; therefore, to kill a human being is
forbidden.

Srila Prabhupada: But the Bible does not simply say, ‘‘Do not kill the
human being.’’ It says broadly, ‘“‘“Thou shalt not kill.”’

Cardinal Danielou: We believe that only human life is sacred.

Srila Prabhupada: That is your interpretation. The commandment is
**Thou shalt not kill.”’

Cardinal Daniélou: It is necessary for man to kill animals in order to
have food to eat.

Srila Prabhupada: No. Man can eat grains, vegetables, fruits, and milk.
Cardinal Daniélou: No flesh?

Srila Prabhupada: No. Human beings are meant to eat vegetarian food.
The tiger does not come to eat your fruits. His prescribed food is animal
flesh. But man’s food is vegetables, fruits, grains, and milk products. So
how can you Say that animal killing is not a sin?

Cardinal Daniélou: We believe it is a question of motivation. If the killing of an animal is for giving food to the hungry, then it is justified.
Srila Prabhupada: But consider the cow: we drink her milk; therefore,
she is our mother. Do you agree?

Cardinal Daniélou: Yes, surely.

122
Understanding Krsna and Christ 123

Srila Prabhupada: So if the cow is your mother, how can you support
killing her? You take the milk from her, and when she’s old and cannot
give you milk, you cut her throat. Is that a very humane proposal? In India those who are meat-eaters are advised to kill some lower animals like
goats, pigs, or even buffalo. But cow killing is the greatest sin. In preaching Krsna consciousness we ask people not to eat any kind of meat, and
my disciples strictly follow this principle. But if, under certain circumstances, others are obliged to eat meat, then they should eat the flesh of
some lower animal. Don’t kill cows. It is the greatest sin. And as long as a
man is sinful, he cannot understand God. The human being’s main business is to understand God and to love Him. But if you remain sinful, you
will never be able to understand God—what to speak of loving Him.
Cardinal Daniélou: I think that perhaps this is not an essential point.
The important thing is to love God. The practical commandments can
vary from one religion to the next.

Srila Prabhupada: So, in the Bible God’s practical commandment is that
you cannot kill; therefore killing cows is a sin for you.

Cardinal Daniélou: God says to the Indians that killing is not good, and
he says to the Jews that...

Srila Prabhupada: No, no. Jesus Christ taught, ‘‘Thou shalt not kill.”’
Why do you interpret this to suit your own convenience?

Cardinal Daniélou: But Jesus allowed the sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb.
Srila Prabhupada: But he never maintained a slaughterhouse.
Cardinal Daniélou: [Laughs.] No, but he did eat meat.

Srila Prabhupada: When there is no other food, someone may eat meat
in order to keep from starving. That is another thing. But it is most sinful
to regularly maintain slaughterhouses just to satisfy your tongue. Actually, you will not even have a human society until this cruel practice of
maintaining slaughterhouses is stopped. And although animal killing
may sometimes be necessary for survival, at least the mother animal, the
cow, should not be killed. That is simply human decency. In the Krsna
consciousness movement our practice is that we don’t allow the killing of
any animals. Krsna says, patram puspam phalam toyam yo me bhaktya
prayacchati: ‘‘Vegetables, fruits, milk, and grains should be offered to Me
in devotion.”” [Bhagavad-gitd 9.26] We take only the remnants of Krsna’s
food (prasdda). The trees offer us many varieties of fruits, but the trees
are not killed. Of course, one living entity is food for another living entity, but that does not mean you can kill your mother for food. Cows are
innocent; they give us milk. You take their milk—and then kill them in
the slaughterhouse. This is sinful.
124 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Student: Srila Prabhupadda, Christianity’s sanction of meat eating is
based on the view that lower species of life do not have a soul like the
human being’s.

Srila Prabhupada: That is foolishness. First of all, we have to understand the evidence of the soul’s presence within the body. Then we can
see whether the human being has a soul and the cow does not. What are
the different characteristics of the cow and the man? If we find a difference in characteristics, then we can say that in the animal there is no
soul. But if we see that the animal and the human being have the same
characteristics, then how can you say that the animal has no soul? The
general symptoms are that the animal eats, you eat; the animal sleeps,
you sleep; the animal mates, you mate; the animal defends, and you defend. Where is the difference?

Cardinal Daniélou: We admit that in the animal there may be the same
type of biological existence as in men, but there is no soul. We believe
that the soul is a human soul.

Srila Prabhupada: Our Bhagavad-gitd says sarva-yonisu, ‘‘In all species
of life the soul exists.’’ The body is like a suit of clothes. You have black
clothes; I am dressed in saffron clothes. But within the dress you are a
human being, and I am also a human being. Similarly, the bodies of the
different species are just like different types of dress. There are 8,400,000
Species, or dresses, but within each one 1s a spirit soul, a part and parcel
of God. Suppose a man has two sons, not equally meritorious. One may
be a Supreme Court judge and the other may be a common laborer, but
the father claims both as his sons. He does not make the distinction that
the son who Is a judge is very important, and the worker-son is not important. And if the judge-son says, ‘‘My dear father, your other son is useless; let me cut him up and eat him,”’ will the father allow this?
Cardinal Danieélou: Certainly not, but the idea that all life is part of the
life of God is difficult for us to admit. There is a great difference between
human life and animal life. :
Srila Prabhupada: That difference is due to the development of consciousness. In the human body there is developed consciousness. Even a
tree has a soul, but a tree’s consciousness is not very developed. If you
cut a tree it does not resist. Actually, it does resist, but only to a very
small degree. There is a scientist named Jagadish Chandra Bose who has
made a machine which shows that trees and plants are able to feel pain
when they are cut. And we can see directly that when someone comes to
kill an animal, it resists, it cries, it makes a horrible sound. So it is a matUnderstanding Krsna and Christ 125

ter of the development of consciousness. But the soul is there within all
living beings.

Cardinal Daniélou: But metaphysically, the life of man is sacred. Human
beings think on a higher platform than the animals do.

Srila Prabhupada: What is that higher platform? The animal eats to
maintain his body, and you also eat in order to maintain your body. The
cow eats grass in the field, and the human being eats meat from a huge
slaughterhouse full of modern machines. But just because you have big
machines and a ghastly scene, while the animal simply eats grass, this
does not mean that you are so advanced that only within your body is
there a soul and that there is not a soul within the body of the animal.
That is illogical. We can see that the basic characteristics are the same in
the animal and the human being.

Cardinal Daniélou: But only in human beings do we find a metaphysical
search for the meaning of life.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. So metaphysically search out why you believe
that there is no soul within the animal—that is metaphysics. If you are
thinking metaphysically, that’s all right. But if you are thinking like an
animal, then what is the use of your metaphysical study? Metaphysical
means ‘‘above the physical’’ or, in other words, ‘“‘spiritual.’’ In the
Bhagavad-gita Krsna says, sarva-yonisu kaunteya: “‘In every living being
there is a spirit soul.’’ That is metaphysical understanding. Now either
you accept Krsna’s teachings as metaphysical, or you’ll have to take a
third-class fool’s opinion as metaphysical. Which do you accept?
Cardinal Daniélou: But why does God create some animals who eat
other animals? There is a fault in the creation, it seems.

Srila Prabhupada: It is not a fault. God is very kind. If you want to eat
animals, then He’ll give you full facility. God will give you the body of a
tiger in your next life so that you can eat flesh very freely. ‘‘Why are you
maintaining slaughterhouses? I’ll give you fangs and claws. Now eat.’’ So
the meat-eaters are awaiting such punishment. The animal-eaters become
tigers, wolves, cats, and dogs in their next life—to get more facility.
V.

Practicing

Yoga

in the

Age of Quarrel

 
Superconsciousness

“The Supersoul, being present within everyone, situated everywhere, is conscious of every existence. The theory that the soul and the Supersoul are one is
not acceptable, because the individual soul's consciousness cannot act in
superconsciousness. This superconsciousness can only be achieved by
dovetailing individual consciousness with the superconsciousness; and this
dovetailing process is called surrender, or Krsna consciousness.”

Krsna consciousness is the highest yoga performance by trained devotional yogis. The yoga system, as is stated in the standard yoga practice
formula given by Lord Krsna in the Bhagavad-gitd, and as recommended
in the Patafijali yoga discipline, is different from the nowadays practiced
hatha-yoga, as is generally understood in the Western countries.

Real yoga practice means to control the senses and, after such control
is established, to concentrate the mind on the Narayana form of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. Lord Krsna is the original
Absolute Personality, the Godhead, and all the other Visnu forms—with
four hands, decorated with conch, lotus, club, and wheel—are plenary

_expansions of Krsna.

In the Bhagavad-gitd it is recommended that we should meditate upon
the form of the Lord. For practicing concentration of the mind, one has
to sit down in a secluded place sanctified by a sacred atmosphere, and the
yogi should observe the rules and regulations of brahmacarya—to live a
life of strict self-restraint and celibacy. No one can practice yoga in a congested city, living a life of extravagance, including unrestricted sex indulgence and adultery of the tongue.

We have already stated that yoga practice means controlling the
senses, and the beginning of controlling the senses is to control the
tongue. You cannot allow the tongue to take all kinds of forbidden food
and drink, and at the same time improve in the practice of yoga. It is a
very regrettable fact that many stray, unauthorized so-called yogis now
come to the West and exploit the leaning of the people toward yoga. Such
unauthorized yogis even dare to say publicly that one can indulge in
drinking and at the same time practice meditation.

128
Practicing. Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 129

Five thousand years ago, in the Bhagavad-gitd dialogue, Lord Krsna
recommended the yoga practice to His disciple Arjuna, but Arjuna flatly
expressed his inability to follow the stringent rules and regulations of
yoga. One should be practical in every field of activity. One should not
waste his valuable time simply in practicing some gymnastic feats in the
name of yoga. Real yoga is to search out the four-handed Supersoul
within one’s heart, and to see Him perpetually in meditation. Such continued meditation is called samadhi. If, however, one wants to meditate
upon something void or impersonal, it will require a very long time to
achieve anything by yoga practice. We cannot concentrate our mind on
something void or impersonal. Real yoga practice is to fix the mind on
the person of the four-handed Narayana who dwells in everyone’s heart.

Sometimes it is said that by meditation one will understand that God is
seated within one’s heart always, even when one does not know it. God is
seated within the heart of everyone. Not only is He seated in the heart of
the human being, but He is also within the hearts of the cats and dogs.
The Bhagavad-gitd certifies this with the declaration that ISvara, the
supreme controller of the world, is seated in the heart of everyone. He is
present not only in everyone’s heart, but also within the atoms. No place
is vacant; no place is without the presence of the Lord.

The feature of the Lord by which He is present everywhere is called the
Paramatma. Atmd means the individual soul, and Paramatma means the
individual Supersoul. Both adtma and Paramatma are individual persons.
The difference between them, however, is that the a@tmd, or soul, is present only in one particular place, whereas the Paramatméa is present
everywhere. ,

In this connection, the example of the sun is very nice. An individual
person may be situated in one place, but the sun, even though a specific
individual entity, is present over the head of every individual person. In
the Bhagavada-gitd this is very nicely explained. Therefore, even though
the qualities of all entities, including the Lord, are equal, the Supersoul is
different from the individual soul by quantity of expansion. The Lord, or
Supersoul, can expand Himself into millions of different forms, while the
individual soul cannot do so.

The Supersoul, being seated in everyone’s heart, can witness everyone’s activities, past, present, and future. In the Upanisads the Supersoul
is said to be sitting with the individual soul as a friend and witness. As a
friend He is always anxious to get the individual soul back home, back to
Godhead. As a witness, He is the endower of all benedictions that result
from the individual’s actions. The Supersoul gives the individual soul all
130 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

facility for achieving whatever he may desire. But He instructs His friend,
so that he may ultimately give up all other engagements and simply surrender unto God for perpetual bliss and eternal life, full of knowledge.
This is the last instruction of the Bhagavad-gitd, the most authorized and
widely read book on all forms of yoga.

The last word of the Bhagavad-gitd, as stated above, is the last word in
the matter of perfecting the yoga system. It is further stated in the
Bhagavad-gita that a person who is always absorbed in Krsna consciousness is the topmost yogi. What is this Krsna consciousness?

Just as the individual soul is present by his consciousness throughout
the whole body, so the Supersoul, or Paramatma, is present throughout
the whole creation by His superconsciousness. This superconsciousness
cannot be imitated by the individual soul, who has limited awareness: I
can understand what is going on within my limited body, but I cannot feel
what is going on in another’s body. I am present all over my body by my
consciousness, but I am not present in any other’s body by my consciousness. However, the Supersoul, or Paramatma, being present within
everyone, situated everywhere, is conscious of every existence. The
theory that the soul and the Supersoul are one is not acceptable, because
the individual soul’s consciousness cannot act in superconsciousness.
This superconsciousness can only be achieved by dovetailing individual
consciousness with the superconsciousness; and this dovetailing process
is called surrender, or Krsna consciousness.

From the teachings of the Bhagavad-gita we learn very clearly that Arjuna in the beginning did not want to fight with his relatives, but after understanding the Bhagavad-gita, when he dovetailed his consciousness
with the superconsciousness of Krsna, his consciousness was Krsna consciousness. A person in full Krsna consciousness acts by the dictation of
Krsna, and so Arjuna agreed to fight the Battle of Kuruksetra.

In the beginning of Krsna consciousness this dictation of the Lord is
received through the transparent medium of the spiritual master. When
one is sufficiently trained and acts with submissive faith and love for
Krsna, under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master, the dovetailing process becomes more firm and accurate. At this stage Krsna dictates
from within. From without, the devotee is helped by the spiritual master,
the bona fide representative of Krsna, and from within the Lord helps the
devotee as caitya-guru, being seated within the heart of everyone.

Simply to understand that God is seated in everyone’s heart is not perfection. One has to be acquainted with God from within and without and
thus act in Krsna consciousness. This is the highest perfectional stage for
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 131

the human form of life, and the topmost stage in all yoga systems.
For a perfect yogi there are eight kinds of superachievements:

One can become smaller than an atom.

. One can become bigger than a mountain.

. One can become lighter than the air.

. One can become heavier than any metal.

. One can achieve any material effect he likes (create a planet, for
example).

One can control others like the Lord can.

. One can freely travel anywhere within (or beyond) the universe.

8. One can choose his own time and place of death, and take rebirth

wherever he may desire.

But when one rises to the perfectional stage of receiving dictation from
the Lord, one is above the stage of the material achievements above
mentioned.

The breathing exercise of the yoga system which is generally practiced
is just the beginning of the system. Meditation on the Supersoul is just a
Step forward. Achievement of wonderful material success is also only a
step forward. But to attain direct contact with the Supersoul and to take
dictation from Him is the highest perfectional stage.

The breathing exercises and meditational practices of yoga are very
difficult in this age. They were difficult even five thousand years ago, or
else Arjuna would not have rejected the proposal of Krsna. This age of
Kali is called a fallen age. At the present moment, people in general are
short-living and very slow in understanding self-realization, or spiritual
life. They are mostly unfortunate, and as such, if someone is a little bit
interested in self-realization, he is misguided by so many frauds. The
only actual way to realization of the perfect stage of yoga is to follow the
principles of the Bhagavad-gita as they were practiced by Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. This is the simplest and highest perfection of yoga practice.

Lord Caitanya practically demonstrated Krsna consciousness yoga
simply by chanting the holy names of Krsna, as they are mentioned in the
Vedanta, the Srimad-Bhagavatam, and many important Puranas. The
largest number of Indians follow this yoga practice, and in the United
States and other countries also it is gradually growing in many cities. It is
very easy and practical for this age, especially for those who are serious
about success in yoga. No other process can be successful in this age.

The meditational process in right earnest was possible in the Golden
Age, Satya-yuga, because the people at that time lived for a hundred
thousand years on the average.

AWN

I
 

132 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

In the present age, however, if you want success in practical yoga, take
to the chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, and feel for yourself
how you are making progress. One should know for himself how much
he is progressing in yoga practice.

In the Bhagavad-gita this practice of Krsna consciousness is described
as rdja-vidya, the king of all erudition; rdja-guhyam, the most confidential
system of spiritual realization; pavitram, the purest of all that is pure;
susukham, very happily performed; and avyayam, inexhaustible.

Those who have taken to this most sublime bhakti-yoga system, this
practice of devotional service in transcendental love of Krsna, can testify
to how they are nicely enjoying its happy and easy execution. Yoga
means controlling the senses, and bhakti-yoga means purifying the
senses. When the senses are purified, they are also, automatically, controlled. You cannot stop the activities of the senses by artificial means,
but if you purify the senses not only are they kept back from rubbish
engagement, but also they become positively engaged in transcendental
service to the Lord.

Krsna consciousness is not manufactured by us through mental
speculation. It is prescribed in the Bhagavad-gita, which says that when
we think in Krsna, chant in Krsna, live in Krsna, eat in Krsna, talk in
Krsna, hope in Krsna, and sustain in Krsna, we return to Krsna without
any doubt. And this is the substance of Krsna consciousness.

 
The Incarnation of Love of God

“Caitanya Mahdprabhu is Krsna Himself, and He is teaching how to develop
love of God by a very simple method. . .. People are embarrassed by so many
methods of realization. They cannot take to the actual ritualistic processes of
meditation or yoga; it is not possible. Therefore Lord Caitanya says that if one
takes up this process of chanting, then immediately he can reach the platform
of realization.”

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the golden avatdra, appeared in India nearly
five hundred years ago. It is the custom in India that when a child is born,
an astrologer is called for. When Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, appeared five thousand years ago, Gargamuni was called by
His father, and he said, ‘This child formerly incarnated in three complexions, such as red and golden, and now He has appeared in blackish
color.’’ Krsna’s color is described in the scriptures as blackish, just like
the color of a cloud. Lord Caitanya is understood to be Krsna appearing
in golden complexion.

There is much evidence in Vedic literature that Caitanya Mahaprabhu
is an incarnation of Krsna, and this is confirmed by scholars and
devotees. In the Srimad-Bhdgavatam it is confirmed that the incarnation
of Krsna, or God, in this present age, Kali-yuga, will always engage in
describing Krsna. He is Krsna, but as a devotee of Krsna He describes
Himself. And in this age His bodily complexion will not be blackish. This
means that it may be white, it may be red, or it may be yellow because
these four colors—white, red, yellow, and black—are the colors assumed
by the incarnations for the different ages. Therefore, since the red, white,
and blackish colors were already taken by former incarnations, the remaining color, golden, is assumed by Caitanya Mahaprabhu. His complexion is not blackish, but He is Krsna.

Another feature of this avatdra is that He is always accompanied by His
associates. In the picture of Caitanya Mahaprabhu one will find that He is
always followed by many devotees chanting. Whenever God incarnates
He has two missions, as stated in the Bhagavad-gita. There Krsna says,

133
 

E
f
LU
4
he
F
‘
i
ie
F
F
.
r
k
E
F
F
i

134 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

*“Whenever I appear, My mission is to deliver the pious devotees and to
annihilate the demons.’’ When Krsna appeared, He had to kill many
demons. If we see a picture of Visnu we will notice that He has a conchShell, lotus flower, club, and disc. These last two items are meant for killing demons. Within this world there are two classes of men—the demons
and the devotees. The devotees are called demigods; they are almost like
God because they have godly qualities. Those who are devotees are
called godly persons, and those who are nondevotees, atheists, are called
demons. So Krsna, or God, comes with two missions: to give protection
to the devotees and to destroy the demons. In this age Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s mission is also like that: to deliver the devotees and to
annihilate the nondevotees, the demons. But in this age He has a
different weapon. That weapon is not aclub or disc or lethal weapon— His
weapon is the sankirtana movement. He killed the demonic mentality of
the people by introducing the sankirtana movement. That is the specific
significance of Lord Caitanya. In this age people are already killing themselves. They have discovered atomic weapons with which to kill themselves, so there is no need for God to kill them. But He appeared to kill
their demonic mentality. That is possible by this Krsna consciousness
movement.

Therefore, in the Srimad-Bhdgavatam it is said that this is the incarnation of God in this age. And who worships Him? The process is very simple. Just keep a picture of Lord Caitanya with His associates. Lord
Caitanya is in the middle, accompanied by His principal associates—
Nitydnanda, Advaita, Gadadhara, and Srivasa. One simply has to keep
this picture. One can keep it anywhere. It is not that one has to come to
us to see this picture. Anyone can have this picture in his home, chant
this Hare Krsna mantra, and thus worship Lord Caitanya. That is the simple method. But who will capture this simple method? Those who have
good brains. Without much bother, if one simply keeps a picture of Sri
Caitanya Mahdaprabhu at home and chants Hare Krsna, then one will
realize God. Anyone can adopt this simple method. There is no expenditure, there is no tax, nor is there any need to build a very big church or
temple. Anyone, anywhere, can sit down on the road or beneath a tree
and chant the Hare Krsna mantra and worship God. Therefore it is a great
Opportunity. For example, in business or political life one sometimes
finds a great opportunity. Those who are intelligent politicians take a
good opportunity and make a success of it the first time it comes.
Similarly, in this age, those who have sufficient intelligence take to this
sankirtana movement, and they advance very quickly.
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 135

Lord Caitanya is called ‘‘the golden avatdra.’’ Avatadra means *‘descending, coming down.”’ Just as one may come down from the fifth
story or the one-hundredth story of a building, an avatara comes down
from the spiritual planets in the spiritual sky. The sky we see with our
naked eyes or with a telescope is only the material sky. But beyond this
there is another sky, which is not possible to see with our eyes or instruments. That information is in the Bhagavad-gita; it is not imagination.
Krsna says that beyond the material sky is another sky, the spiritual sky.

We have to take Krsna’s word as it is. For example, we teach small
children that beyond England there are other places called Germany and
India, and the child has to learn about these places from the version of
the teacher because they are beyond his sphere. Similarly, beyond this
material sky there is another sky. One cannot experiment to find it, any
more than a small child can experiment to find Germany or India. That is
not possible. If we want to get knowledge, then we have to accept authority. Similarly, if we want to know what is beyond the material world
then we have to accept the Vedic authority, otherwise there is no
possibility of knowing. It is beyond material knowledge. One cannot go to
the far planets in this universe, and what to speak of going beyond this
universe? The estimation is that in order to go to the highest planet of
this universe with modern machinery one would have to travel for forty
thousand light-years. So we cannot even travel within this material sky.
Our lifetime and means are so limited that we cannot have proper knowledge of even this material world.

In the Bhagavad-gita, when Arjuna asked Krsna, ‘Will you kindly explain the extent to which Your energies are working?’’ the Supreme Lord
gave him so many instances, and at the end He finally said, ‘‘My dear Arjuna, what shall I explain about My energies? It is not actually possible
for you to understand. But you can just imagine the expansion of My
energies: this material world, which consists of millions of universes, is a
display of only one fourth of My creation.’’ We cannot estimate the position of even one universe, and there are millions of universes. Then
beyond that is the spiritual sky, and there are millions of spiritual planets.
All this information is available from the Vedic literature. If one accepts
Vedic literature, then he can get this knowledge. If one doesn’t accept it,
there is no other means. That is our choice. Therefore, according to
Vedic civilization, whenever an dcarya speaks he immediately gives
references from the Vedic literature. Then others will accept it: ‘“Yes, it is
correct.’’ In a law court the lawyer gives references from past judgments
of the court, and if his case is tight, the judge accepts. Similarly, if one
136 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

can give evidence from the Vedas, then it is understood that his position
is factual.

The avatara for this age, Lord Caitanya, is described in Vedic literature. We cannot accept anyone as an avatara unless he has the
symptoms described in the scriptures. We do not whimsically accept
Lord Caitanya as an avatdra on the basis of votes. Nowadays it has
become a fashion that any man can come and say that he is God or an incarnation of God, and some fools and rascals will accept it: “Oh, he is
God.’’ We do not accept an avatdra like that. We take evidence from the
Vedas. An avatara must conform to descriptions in the Vedas. Then we
accept him; otherwise no. For each avatara there is a description in the
Vedas: He will appear at such and such a place, in such and such a form,
and He will act like this. That is the nature of Vedic evidence.

In the Srimad-Bhdgavatam there is a list of the avatdras, and there is
mention of Lord Buddha’s name. This Srimad-Bhdgavatam was written
five thousand years ago, and it mentions different names for future
times. It says that in the future the Lord would appear as Lord Buddha,
his mother’s name would be Afjana, and he would appear in Gaya. So
Buddha appeared twenty-six hundred years ago, and the SrimaaBhagavatam, which was written five thousand years ago, mentioned that
in the future he would appear. Similarly, there is mention of Lord
Caitanya, and similarly the last avatdra of this Kali-yuga is also mentioned in the Bhagavatam. It is mentioned that the last incarnation in this
age is Kalki. He will appear as the son of a brahmana whose name is
Visnu-yasa, in a place called Sambhala. There is a place in India with that
name, so perhaps it is there that the Lord will appear.

So an avatdra must conform to the descriptions in the Upanisads,
Srimad-Bhagavatam, Mahabharata, and other Vedic literatures. And on
the authority of Vedic literature and the commentary of great, stalwart
goswamis like Jiva Goswami, who was the greatest scholar and philosopher in the world, we can accept Lord Caitanya as an incarnation of
Krsna.

Why did Lord Caitanya appear? In the Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna says,
*°Give up all other engagements and simply engage in My service. I will
give you protection from all results of sinful actions.’ In this material
world, in conditional life, we are simply creating sinful reactions. That’s
all. And because of sinful reactions, we have received this body. If our
sinful reactions stopped we would not have to take a material body; we
Should get a spiritual body.

What is a spiritual body? A spiritual body is a body which is free from

 
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 137

death, birth, disease, and old age. It is an eternal body, full of knowledge
and bliss. Different bodies are created by different desires. As long as we
have desires for different kinds of enjoyment, we have to accept different
kinds of material bodies. Krsna, God, is so kind that He awards whatever
we want. If we want a tiger’s body, with tigerlike strength and teeth with
which to capture animals and suck fresh blood, then Krsna will give us
the opportunity. And if we want the body of a saintly person, a devotee
engaged only in the service of the Lord, then He will give us that body.
This is stated in the Bhagavad-gitd.

If a person engaged in yoga, the process of self-realization, somehow
or other fails to complete the process, he is given another chance; he is
given birth in a family of a pure brdhmana or a rich man. If one is fortunate enough to take birth in such a family, he gets all facilities to understand the importance of self-realization. From the very beginning of life
our Krsna conscious children are getting the opportunity to learn how to
chant and dance, so when they are grown up they will not change, but instead will automatically make progress. They are very fortunate. Regardless of whether he is born in America or Europe, a child will advance if
his father and mother are devotees. He gets this opportunity. If a child
takes birth in a family of devotees, this means that in his last life he had
already taken to the yoga process, but somehow or other he could not
finish it. Therefore the child is given another opportunity to make
progress under the care of a good father and mother so that he will again
advance. In this way, as soon as one completes his development of God
consciousness, then he no longer has to take birth in this material world,
but returns to the spiritual world.

Krsna says in the Bhagavad-gita: ‘‘My dear Arjuna, if one understands
My appearance, disappearance, and activities, simply because of this understanding he is given the opportunity to take birth in the spiritual world
after giving up this body.’’ One has to give up this body—today, tomorrow, or maybe the day after that. One has to. But a person who has understood Krsna will not have to take another material body. He goes directly
to the spiritual world and takes birth in one of the spiritual planets. So
Krsna says that as soon as one gets this body—it doesn’t matter if it is
from India or the moon or the sun or Brahmaloka or anywhere within
this material world—one should know that it is due to his sinful activities.
There are degrees of sinful activities, so according to the degree of sinfulness, one takes a material body. Therefore our real problem is not how to
eat, sleep, mate, and defend—our real problem is how to get a body
which is not material but spiritual. That is the ultimate solution to all
138 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

problems. So Krsna guarantees that if one surrenders unto Him, if one
becomes fully Krsna conscious, then He will give one protection from all
reactions to sinful life.

This assurance was given by Krsna in the Bhagavad-gita, but there
were many fools who could not understand Krsna. In the Bhagavada-gita
they are described as miuidhas. Mtidha means “‘rascal,’’ and Krsna says in
the Gita, ‘“They do not know what I actually am.’’ So many people misunderstood Krsna. Although Krsna gave us this message of the
Bhagavad-gita so that we could understand Him, many people missed the
opportunity. Therefore Krsna, out of His compassion, came again, as a
devotee, and showed us how to surrender unto Krsna. Krsna Himself
came to teach us how to surrender. His last instruction in the Bhagavadgita is to surrender, but people— mddhas, rascals—said, ‘*"Why should I
surrender?’’ Therefore, although Caitanya Mahaprabhu is Krsna Himself, this time He teaches us practically how to execute the mission of the
Bhagavad-gita. That’s all. Caitanya Mahaprabhu is teaching nothing extraordinary, nothing beyond the process of surrendering to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead which was already taught in the Bhagavad-gita.
There is no other teaching, but the same teaching is presented in different ways so that different kinds of people may take it and take the opportunity to approach God.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu gives us the opportunity to reach God directly.
When Ripa Goswami, the principal disciple of Lord Caitanya, first saw
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he was a minister in the government of Bengal
but wanted to join Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s movement. So he gave up his
position as a minister, and after joining, when he surrendered, he offered
a nice prayer to Lord Caitanya. This prayer says:

namo maha-vadanyaya
krsna-prema-pradaya te

krsnaya krsna-caitanyanamne gaura-tvise namah

‘‘My dear Lord, You are the most munificent of all the incarnations.”’
Why? Krsna-prema-pradaya te: *“You are directly giving love of God. You
have no other purpose. Your process is so nice that one can immediately
learn to love God. Therefore You are the most munificent of all incarnations. And it is not possible for any personality other than Krsna Himself
to deliver this benediction; therefore I say that You are Krsna.’’ Krsnaya
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 139

krsna-caitanya-namne: *“You are Krsna, but You have assumed the name
Krsna Caitanya. I surrender unto You.”’

So this is the process. Caitanya Mahaprabhu is Krsna Himself, and He
is teaching how to develop love of God by a very simple method. He says
simply to chant Hare Krsna. |

harer nama harer nama
harer nadmaiva kevalam

kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha

“In this age, simply go on chanting the Hare Krsna mantra. There is no
other alternative.’’ People are embarrassed by so many methods of
realization. They cannot take to the actual ritualistic processes of meditation or yoga; it is not possible. Therefore Lord Caitanya says that if one
takes up this process of chanting, then immediately he can reach the platform of realization.

The chanting process offered by Lord Caitanya for achieving love of
God is called sankirtana. Sankirtana is a Sanskrit word. Sam means
samyak—‘‘complete.’’ And kirtana means ‘“‘glorifying’’ or ‘‘describing.”’
So complete description means complete glorification of the Supreme, or
the Supreme Complete Whole. It is not that one can describe anything or
glorify anything and that will be kirtana. From the grammatical point of
view that may be Kirtana, but according to the Vedic system, kirtana
means describing the supreme authority, the Absolute Truth, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is called kirtana.

This devotional service begins wtih the method of sravana. Sravana
means “‘hearing,’’ and kirtana means ‘‘describing.’’ One should describe, and another should hear. Or the same man himself can both describe and hear. He does not need anyone else’s help. When we chant
Hare Krsna, we chant and hear. This is complete. This is a complete
method. But what is that chanting and hearing? One must chant and hear
about Visnu, Krsna. Not of anything else. Sravanam kirtanam visnoh: one
can understand Visnu, the all-pervading Absolute Truth, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, by the method of hearing.

We have to hear; if one simply hears, that is the beginning. One does
not need any education or development of material knowledge. Just like
a child: as soon as he hears, immediately he can respond and dance. So by
nature God has given us these nice instruments—ears—so that we can
140 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

hear. But we must hear from the right source. That is stated in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam. One must hear from those who are devoted to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. They are called satdm. If one hears
from the right source, from a realized soul, then it will act. And these
words of God, or Krsna, are very relishable. If one is intelligent enough,
he will listen to what is spoken by the realized soul. Then very soon he
will be released from material entanglements.

This human life is meant for advancing on the path of liberation. That
is called apavarga, freedom from entanglement. We are all entangled.
Our acceptance of this material body means that we are already entangled. But we should not progress in the process of entanglement. That
process is called karma. As long as the mind 1s absorbed in karma, we will
have to accept a material body. At the time of death, our mind may be
thinking, ““Oh, I could not complete this work. Oh, Iam dying! I have to
do this. I have to do that.’’ This means that Krsna will give us another
chance to do it, and so we will have to accept another body. He will give
us the chance: “All right. You could not do it. Now do it. Take this
body.’? Therefore the Srimad-Bhdgavatam says, ‘‘These rascals have
become madly intoxicated; because of intoxication they are doing something they should not have done.’’ What are they doing? Maharaja
Dhrtarastra is a very good example. Maharaja Dhrtarastra was cunningly
planning to kill the Pandavas in order to favor his own sons, so Krsna
sent His uncle, Akrira, to advise him not to do that. Dhrtarastra understood Akrura’s instructions, but he said, ‘‘My dear Akrtra, what you are
saying is quite right, but it does not stand in my heart, so I cannot change
my policy. I have to follow this policy and let whatever happens take
place.”’

So when men want to satisfy their senses, they become mad, and in
this madness they’ll do anything and everything. For example, there
have been many instances in material life where someone has become
mad after something and has committed a criminal act such as murder.
The person could not check himself. Similarly, we are accustomed to
sense gratification. We are mad, and therefore our minds are fully absorbed in karma. This is very unfortunate because our body, although
temporary, is the reservoir of all misfortunes and miseries; it is always
giving us trouble. These matters are to be studied. We should not be
mad. Human life is not meant for that. The defect of the present civilization is that people are mad after sense gratification. That is all. They do
not know the real value of life, and therefore they are neglecting the most
valuable form of life, this human form.
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 141

When this body is finished there is no guarantee what kind of body one
will take next. Suppose in my next life I by chance get the body of a tree.
For thousands of years I will have to stand up. But people are not very
serious. They even say, “‘What is that? Even if I have to stand up, I shall
forget.’’ The lower species of life are situated in forgetfulness. If a tree
were not forgetful it would be impossible for it to live. Suppose we were
told, ‘“You stand up for three days here!’’ Because we are not forgetful,
we would become mad. So, by nature’s law, all these lower species of life
are forgetful. Their consciousness is not developed. A tree has life, but
even if someone cuts it, because its consciousness is not developed, it
does not respond. So we should be very careful to utilize this human
form of life properly. The Krsna consciousness movement is meant for
achieving perfection in life. It is not a bluff or exploitation, but unfortunately people are accustomed to being bluffed. There is a verse by an
Indian poet: “‘If one speaks nice things, people will quarrel with him:
‘Oh, what nonsense you are speaking.’ But if he bluffs them and cheats
them, they will be very glad.”’ So if a bluffer says, ‘‘Just do this, give me
my fee, and within six months you will become God,’’ then they will
agree: ‘“Yes, take this fee, and I shall become God within six months.”’
No. These cheating processes will not solve our problem. If one actually
wants to solve the problems of life in this age, then he has to take to this
process of kirtana. That is the recommended process.

harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam

kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha

In this age, Kali-yuga, one cannot execute any process of self-realization
or perfection of life other than kirtana. Kirtana is essential in this age.
In all Vedic literatures it is confirmed that one must meditate on the
Supreme Absolute Truth, Visnu, not on anything else. But there are
different processes of meditation recommended for different ages. The
process of mystic yogic meditation was possible in Satya-yuga, when men
lived for many thousands of years. Now people will not believe this, but
in a previous age there were people who lived for one hundred thousand
years. That age was called Satya-yuga, and the meditation of mystic yoga
was possible at that time. In that age the great yogi Valmiki Muni meditated for sixty thousand years. So that is a long-term process, which is not
possible to execute in this age. If one wishes to conduct a farce, that is
142 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

another matter. But if one actually wants to practice such meditation, it
takes an extremely long time to perfect. In the next age, Treta-yuga, the
process of realization was to perform the various ritualistic sacrifices
recommended in the Vedas. In the next age, Dvapara-yuga, the process
was temple worship. In this present age the same result can be achieved
by the process of hari-kirtana, glorification of Hari, Krsna, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

No other kirtana is recommended. This hari-kirtana was started five
hundred years ago in Bengal by Lord Caitanya. In Bengal there is competition between the Vaisnavas and the sa@ktas. The sdaktas have introduced a certain type of kirtana called kali-kirtana. But in the Vedic
scriptures there is no recommendation of kdli-kirtana. Kirtana means
hari-kirtana. One cannot say, ““Oh, you are Vaisnava. You can perform
hari-kirtana. 1 shall perform siva-kirtana or devi-kirtana or ganesakirtana.’’ No. The Vedic scriptures do not authorize any kirtana other
than hari-kirtana. Kirtana means hari-kirtana, the glorification of Krsna.

So this process of hari-kirtana is very simple: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare. Actually there are only three words: Hare, Krsna, and Rama. But
they are very nicely arranged for chanting so that everyone can take the
mantra and chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare.
Since we have started this movement in the Western countries, Europeans, Americans, Africans, Egyptians, and Japanese are all chanting.
There is no difficulty. They are chanting very gladly, and they are getting
the results. What is the difficulty? We are distributing this chanting free
of charge, and it is very simple. Simply by chanting, one can have selfrealization, God realization, and when there is God realization, then
nature realization is included also. For example, if one learns one, two,
three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, and zero, then he has studied
the entirety of mathematics because mathematics means simply changing the places of these ten figures. That’s all. Similarly, if one simply
studies Krsna, then all his knowledge is perfect. And Krsna is easily understood simply by chanting this mantra, Hare Krsna. So why not take
this opportunity?

Take this opportunity that is being offered to human society. It is very
ancient and scientific. It is not that it is a concoction that will last for only
three or four years. No. In the Bhagavad-gita Krsna Himself says, “This
philosophy is inexhaustible and indestructible. It is never lost or
destroyed.’’ It may be covered for the time being, but it is never
destroyed. Therefore it is called avyayam. Vyaya means ‘‘exhaustion.”’
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel | 143

For example, one may have a hundred dollars, and if they are spent one
after another, the next day it will come to zero. That is vyaya, exhaustible. But Krsna consciousness is not like that. If you cultivate this knowledge of Krsna consciousness, then it will increase. That is certified by
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Anandambudhi-vardhanam. Ananda means
“‘pleasure,’’ “‘transcendental bliss,’’ and ambudhimeans ‘‘ocean.’’ In the
material world we see that the ocean does not increase: But if one cultivates Krsna consciousness, then his transcendental bliss will simply increase. Anandambudhi-vardhanam. And I shall always remind everyone
that the process is very simple. Anyone can chant, anywhere, without
taxation or loss, but the gain is very great.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has explained this kirtana movement in His
Siksdstaka. Siksé means ‘‘instruction,”’ and astaka means “‘eight.”’ He
has given us eight verses to help us understand this Krsna consciousness
movement, and I shall explain the first of these instructions. The Lord
Says, ceto-darpana-marjanam: one should cleanse the heart. I have explained this several times, but it does not become monotonous. It is just
like the chanting of Hare Krsna; it does not become tiresome. Our students can chant the Hare Krsna mantra twenty-four hours a day, and they
will never get tired. They will continue to dance and chant. And anyone
can try it; because it is not material, one will never get tired of chanting
Hare Krsna. In the material world, if one chants anything, any favorite
name, for three, four, or ten times, he will get tired of it. That is a fact.
But because Hare Krsna is not material, if one chants this mantra, he will
never get tired. The more one chants, the more his heart will be cleansed
of material dirt and the more the problems of his life within this material
world will be solved.

What is the problem of our lives? That we do not know. Modern
education never gives enlightenment about the real problem of life. That
iS indicated in the Bhagavad-gita. Those who are educated and are
advancing in knowledge should know what is the problem of life. This
problem is stated in the Bhagavad-gita: one should always see the inconveniences of birth, death, old age, and disease. Unfortunately no one
pays attention to these problems. When a man is diseased he thinks, °° All
right. Let me go to the doctor. He will give me some medicine, and I will
be cured.’ But he does not consider the problem very seriously. ‘‘I did
not want this disease. Why is there disease? Is it not possible to become
free from disease?’’ He never thinks that way. This is because his intelligence is very low-grade, just like that of an animal. An animal suffers,
but it has no sense. If an animal is brought to a slaughterhouse and sees
144 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

that the animal before him is being slaughtered, he will still stand there
contentedly eating the grass. This is animal life. He does not know that
next time it will be his turn and he will be slaughtered. I have seen it. Ina
Kali temple I have seen that a goat was standing there ready to be
sacrificed and another goat was very happily eating the grass.

Similarly, Maharaja Yudhisthira was asked by Yamaraja, ‘‘What is the
most wonderful thing in this world? Can you explain?’’ So Maharaja
Yudhisthira answered, ‘‘Yes. The most wonderful thing is that at every
moment one can see that his friends, his fathers, and his relatives have
died, but he is thinking, ‘I shall live forever.’ ’’ He never thinks that he
will die, just as an animal never thinks that at the next moment he may
be slaughtered. He is satisfied with the grass, that’s all. He is satisfied
with the sense gratification. He does not know that he is also going to die.

My father has died, my mother has died, he has died, she has died. So I
will also have to die. Then what is after death? I do not know. This is the
problem. People do not take this problem seriously, but the Bhagavadgita indicates that that is real education. Real education is to inquire why,
although we do not want to die, death comes. That is real inquiry. We do
not want to become old men. Why does old age come upon us? We have
many problems, but this is the sum and substance of all of them.

In order to solve this problem, Lord Caitanya Mahdaprabhu prescribes
the chanting of Hare Krsna. As soon as our heart is cleansed by chanting
this Hare Krsna mantra, the blazing fire of our problematic material existence is extinguished. How is it extinguished? When we cleanse our
heart we will realize that we do not belong to this material world. Because
people are identifying with this material world, they are thinking, ‘‘I am
an Indian, I am an Englishman, I am this, I am that.’’ But if one chants
the Hare Krsna mantra, he will realize that he is not this material body.
‘‘T do not belong to this material body or this material world. I am a spirit
soul, part and parcel of the Supreme. I am eternally related with Him,
and I have nothing to do with the material world.’’ This is called liberation, knowledge. If I don’t have anything to do with this material world,
then I am liberated. And that knowledge is called brahma-bhita.

A person with this realization has no duty to perform. Because we are
now identifying our existence with this material world, we have so many
duties. The Srimad-Bhdgavatam says that as long as there is no selfrealization, we have so many duties and debts. We are indebted to the
demigods. The demigods are not merely fictitious. They are real. There
are demigods controlling the sun, the moon, and the air. Just as there are
directors of government departments, so for the heating department
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 145

there is the sun-god, for the air department there is Varuna, and similarly
there are other departmental demigods. In the Vedas they are described
as controlling deities, so we cannot neglect them. Also, there are great
sages and philosophers who have given us Knowledge, and we are indebted to them. So as soon as we take birth we are indebted to so many
living entities, but it is impossible to liquidate all these debts. Therefore
the Vedic literature recommends that one take shelter of the lotus feet of
Krsna. And Krsna says, ““If one takes shelter of Me, then he doesn’t
have to take shelter of anyone else.”’

Therefore those who are Krsna conscious devotees have taken shelter
of Krsna, and the beginning is hearing and chanting. Sravanam kirtanam
visnoh. So our fervent, humble request to everyone is to please accept
this chanting. This movement of Krsna consciousness was introduced by
Lord Caitanya five hundred years ago in Bengal, and now all over India
and especially in Bengal there are millions of followers of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Now this movement is starting in the Western countries,
SO just be very serious in understanding it. We do not criticize any other
religion. Don’t take it in that way. We have no business criticizing any
other process of religion. Krsna consciousness is giving people the most
sublime religion—love of God. That’s all. We are teaching to love God.
Everyone ts already loving, but that love is misplaced. We love this boy
or this girl or this country or that society or even the cats and dogs, but
we are not satisfied. So we must place our love in God. If one places one’s
love in God, he will be happy.

Don’t think that this Krsna consciousness movement is a new type of
religion. Where is the religion which does not recognize God? One may
call God ‘‘Allah’’ or “‘Krsna’’ or something else, but where is that
religion which does not recognize God? We are teaching that one should
simply try to love God. We are attracted by so many things, but if our
love is reposed in God, then we will be happy. We don’t have to learn to
love anything else; everything else is automatically included. Just try to
love God. Don’t try to love just trees or plants or insects. This will never
satisfy. Learn to love God. That is Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s mission; that
is our mission. |
Chanting the Hare Krsna Maha-mantra

“, .. [his simplest method of meditation is recommended for this age. By practical experience also, one can perceive that by chanting this maha-mantra, or
the Great Chanting for Deliverance, one can feel a transcendental ecstasy
coming through from the spiritual stratum... .”

The transcendental vibration established by the chanting of Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,
Rama Rama, Hare Hare is the sublime method for reviving our transcendental consciousness. As living spiritual souls, we are all originally Krsna
conscious entities, but due to our association with matter from time immemorial, our consciousness is now adulterated by the material atmosphere. The material atmosphere, in which we are now living, is called
maya, or illusion. Mayda means ‘‘that which is not.’’ And what is this illusion? The illusion is that we are all trying to be lords of material nature,
while actually we are under the grip of her stringent laws. When a servant
artificially tries to imitate the all-powerful master, he is said to be in illusion. We are trying to exploit the resources of material nature, but actually we are becoming more and more entangled in her complexities.
Therefore, although we are engaged in a hard struggle to conquer nature,
we are ever more dependent on her. This illusory struggle against
material nature can be stopped at once by revival of our eternal Krsna
consciousness.

Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare is the transcendental process for reviving this original, pure consciousness. By chanting this
transcendental vibration, we can cleanse away all misgivings within our
hearts. The basic principle of all such misgivings is the false consciousness that I am the lord of all I survey.

Krsna consciousness is not an artificial imposition on the mind. This
consciousness is the original, natural energy of the living entity. When
we hear this transcendental vibration, this consciousness is revived. This

146
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 147

simplest method of meditation is recommended for this age. By practical
experience also, one can perceive that by chanting this mahda-mantra, or
the Great Chanting for Deliverance, one can at once feel a transcendental ecstasy coming through from the spiritual stratum. In the material
concept of life we are busy in the matter of sense gratification as if we
were in the lower, animal stage. A little elevated from this status of sense
gratification, one is engaged in mental speculation for the purpose of getting out of the material clutches. A little elevated from this speculative
status, when one is intelligent enough, one tries to find out the supreme
cause of all causes—within and without. And when one is factually on the
plane of spiritual understanding, surpassing the stages of sense, mind,
and intelligence, he is then on the transcendental plane. This chanting of
the Hare Krsna mantra is enacted from the spiritual platform, and thus
this sound vibration surpasses all lower strata of consciousness— namely
sensual, mental, and intellectual. There is no need, therefore, to underStand the language of the mantra, nor is there any need for mental speculation nor any intellectual adjustment for chanting this maha-mantra. It is
automatic, from the spiritual platform, and as such, anyone can take part
in the chanting without any previous qualification. In a more advanced
Stage, of course, one is not expected to commit offenses on the grounds
of spiritual understanding.

In the beginning, there may not be the presence of all transcendental
ecstasies, which are eight in number. These are: (1) being stopped as
though dumb, (2) perspiration, (3) standing up of hairs on the body,
(4) dislocation of voice, (5) trembling, (6) fading of the body, (7) crying
in ecstasy, and (8) trance. But there is no doubt that chanting for a while
takes one immediately to the spiritual platform, and one shows the first
symptom of this in the urge to dance along with the chanting of the
mantra. We have seen this practically. Even a child can take part in the
chanting and dancing. Of course, for one who is too entangled in material
life, it takes a little more time to come to the standard point, but even
such a materially engrossed man is raised to the spiritual platform very
quickly. When the mantra is chanted by a pure devotee of the Lord in
love, it has the greatest efficacy on hearers, and as such this chanting
should be heard from the lips of a pure devotee of the Lord, so that immediate effects can be achieved. As far as possible, chanting from the lips
of nondevotees should be avoided. Milk touched by the lips of a serpent
has poisonous effects.

The word Hard is the form of addressing the energy of the Lord, and
the words Arsna and Rama are forms of addressing the Lord Himself.
148 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Both Krsna and Rama mean “‘the supreme pleasure,’’ and Hard is the
supreme pleasure energy of the Lord, changed to Hare in the vocative.
The supreme pleasure energy of the Lord helps us to reach the Lord.

The material energy, called mdyd, is also one of the multienergies of
the Lord. And we, the living entities, are also the energy, marginal energy, of the Lord. The living entities are described as superior to material
energy. When the superior energy is in contact with the inferior energy,
an incompatible situation arises; but when the superior marginal energy
is in contact with the superior energy, Hard, it is established in its happy,
normal condition.

These three words, namely Hare, Krsna, and Rama, are the transcendental seeds of the mahd-mantra. The chanting is a spiritual call for the
Lord and His energy, to give protection to the conditioned soul. This
chanting is exactly like the genuine cry of a child for its mother’s presence. Mother Hara helps the devotee achieve the Lord Father’s grace,
and the Lord reveals Himself to the devotee who chants this mantra
Sincerely.

No other means of spiritual realization is as effective in this age of
quarrel and hypocrisy as the chanting of the mahd-mantra: Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare.
SRS Ne ee ey en ee TS EY SARI RSY Pee ne et a a ts a SNS Cte a cat WA are ot, eyoeatee + ePye mentee grt wim tea ee

Krsna Consciousness—
The Yoga for the Modern Age

“It is not that this movement is simply a sentimental movement. Don't think
that these boys are dancing out of some religious sentiment or fanaticism. No.
We have the highest philosophical and theosophical background. ... But it is
all simplified. That is the beauty of this movement. Whether one is a great
scholar or a child, he can take part without any difficulty.”

ceto-darpana-marjanam bhava-mahadavagni-nirvapanam
Sreyah-kairava-candrika-vitaranam vidya-vadhi-jivanam

anandambudhi-vardhanam pratipadam purnamrtasvadanam
sarvatma-snapanam param vijayate sri-krsna-sankirtanam

All glories to the sankirtana movement. Param vijayate sri-krsnasankirtanam. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, when He was only a sixteenyear-old boy, introduced this sankirtana movement five hundred years
ago in Navadvipa, India. It was not that He manufactured some religious
system, just as nowadays so many religious systems are being manufactured. Actually religion cannot be manufactured. Dharmam tu sadksad
bhagavat-pranitam. Religion means the codes of God, the laws of God,
that’s all. Certainly we cannot live without obeying the state laws, and
similarly we cannot live without obeying the laws of God. And in the
Bhagavad-gita [4.7] the Lord says that whenever there are discrepancies
in the prosecution of religious activities (yadda yada hi dharmasya glanir
bhavati bharata) and there is a predominance of irreligious activities
(abhyutthanam adharmasya), at that time I (Krsna) appear (tadatmadnam
srjamy aham). And in the material world we can see the same principle
demonstrated, for whenever there is disobedience of state laws, there is
the advent of some particular state officer or policeman to ‘‘set things
right.”’

Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is worshiped by the Goswamis. There were
six Goswamis: Rupa Goswami, Sanatana Goswami, Raghunatha Bhatta
Goswami, Jiva Goswami, Gopala Bhatta Goswami, and Sri Raghunatha

149
150 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

dasa Goswami. There are three meanings of go. Go means “‘land,’’ go
means ‘“‘cow,’’and go means “‘senses.’’ And swami means ‘‘master.’’ So
goswamimeans that they were masters of the senses. When one becomes
master of the senses, or goswami, he can make progress in spiritual life.
That is the real meaning of swami. Swami means that one is not servant
of the senses, but master of them.

One of these six Goswamis, RUpa Goswami, was the head, and he
compiled a nice verse in honor of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He says:

anarpita-carim cirat karunayavatirnah kalau
samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasam sva-bhakti-sriyam
harih purata-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandipitah
sada hrdaya-kandare sphuratu vah saci-nandanah
[Caitanya-caritamrta, Adi 1.4]

Kalau means this age, this age of Kali, the Iron Age, which is very much
contaminated, an age of quarrel and disagreement. Ripa Goswami says
that in this age of Kali, when everything is disagreement and quarrel,
‘*You have descended to offer the highest love of God.’’ Samarpayitum
unnatojjvala-rasam: and not only the topmost, but a very brilliant rasa, or
transcendental humor. Purata-sundara-dyuti: Your complexion is just like
gold, like the luster of gold. ‘‘You are so kind that I bless everyone [the
Goswamis can bless because they are masters of the senses] that this
form of the Lord, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, may always remain dancing in everyone’s heart.”

When Ripa Goswami first met Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Prayaga,
Lord Caitanya was chanting and dancing in the street, “‘Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna.’ At that time also Ripa Goswami offered one prayer. Namo
mahda-vadanyaya krsna-prema-pradaya te: ‘‘Oh, You are the most munificent of all incarnations because You are distributing love of Godhead.”’
Krsna-prema-pradaya te/f krsnadya krsna-caitanya-namne gaura-tvise
namah: *“‘You are Krsna Himself because if You were not Krsna You
could not distribute krsna-prema, or love of God, for love of Krsna is not
so easily acquired. But You are distributing this love freely to everyone.’

In this way the sankirtana movement was inaugurated in Bengal, India,
in Navadvipa. In this sense, the Bengalis are very fortunate that in
their country this movement was inaugurated by Lord Caitanya, who
predicted:

prthivite ache yata nagaradi grama
sarvatra pracara haibe mora nama
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 151

““In all the. villages and towns all over the world, everywhere, this
sankirtana movement will be preached.’’ That is His prediction.

So by the grace of Lord Caitanya, this movement is already introduced
in the Western countries, beginning from New York. Our sankirtana
movement was first introduced in New York in 1966. At that time I came
and began to chant this Hare Krsna mantra in Tompkins Square. I was
chanting there for three hours with a small mrdanga (drum), and these
American boys assembled and gradually joined, and so it is increasing.
First of all it was started in a New York storefront, 26 Second Avenue,
then we started our branches in San Francisco, Montreal, Boston, Los
Angeles, Buffalo, Columbus. We now [1970] have twenty-four branches,
including one in London and one in Hamburg. In London they are all
American boys and girls, and they are preaching. They are not sannyasis,
nor are they Vedantists, nor Hindus, nor Indians, but they have taken
this movement very seriously. Even in the London Times there was an
article headlined, “‘Krsna Chant Startles London.’’ So we have many in
the movement now. All my disciples, at least in this country, are
Americans and Europeans. They are chanting, dancing, and distributing
a magazine, Back to Godhead. Now we have published many books—the
Srimad-Bhagavatam, Bhagavad-gita As It Is, Teachings of Lord Caitanya,
and Isopanisad. \t is not that this movement is simply a sentimental
movement. Don’t think that these boys are dancing out of some religious
sentiment or fanaticism. No. We have the highest philosophical and
theosophical background.

As an illustration, let us consider Caitanya Mahaprabhu. While He was
preaching, He went to Benares, the seat of Mayavadi sannydsis. The
followers of Sankardcadrya are mostly seen in Benares. When Caitanya
Mahaprabhu was there, He was chanting and dancing. Some of the people very much appreciated this, and so He quickly became famous. One
prominent sannyasi, Prakasananda Sarasvati, leader of many thousands
of Mayavadi sannya@sis, was informed: ‘‘Oh, from Bengal one young sannyasi has come. He is so nicely chanting and dancing.’’ Prakasananda
Sarasvati was a great Vedantist, and he did not like the idea. He said,
*“Oh, He is a pseudo-sannyasi. He is chanting and dancing, and this is not
the business of a sannyasi. A sannydsi should always engage himself in
the study of philosophy and the Veddnta.”’ ,

Then one of the devotees who did not like the remarks of Prakasananda Sarasvati came back and informed Lord Caitanya that He was
being criticized. So the devotee arranged a meeting of all the sannyasis,
and there was a philosophical discussion on the Vedanta between Prakasdnanda Sarasvati and Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. These accounts and
152 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

philosophical discussions are given in our Teachings of Lord Caitanya. It
is remarkable that Prakdsdananda himself with all his disciples became
Vaisnavas.

Similarly, Caitanya Mahaprabhu had a great discussion with Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, the greatest logician of that time, who was also
Mayavadi, impersonalist, and he was also converted. So Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s movement is not mere sentimentalism. There is a very
rich background if one wants to understand this sankirtana movement
through philosophy and logic. There is ample opportunity, for this movement is based on science and on the authority of the Vedas. But it is all
simplified. That is the beauty of this movement. Whether one is a great
scholar or philosopher or a child, he can take part without any difficulty.
Other systems of self-realization, the jmadna process or yoga process, are
also recognized, but it is not possible to practice them in this age. That is
the verdict of the Vedas:

krte yad dhyayato visnum
tretayam yajato makhaih
dvapare paricaryayam
kalau tad dhari-kirtanat
[Srimad-Bhdagavatam 12.3.52]

In the Satya-yuga, the Golden Age, it was possible to execute the
meditation process. For instance, Valmiki Muni meditated for sixty
thousand years to get perfection. But where is our old age? Besides that,
for the meditation process, as described in the Bhagavad-gita, one has to
select a secluded place, he has to execute it alone, he has to sit down ina
rigid posture, he has to lead a life of complete celibacy, and so on. There
are many rules and regulations. Thus astdanga-yoga meditation is not
possible. If one is satisfied by imitating, that is a different thing, but if one
wants perfection, then he has to execute all the eight stages of astangayoga. If this is not possible, then it is a waste of time.

What is the ultimate goal of the yoga process or meditation? Contact
with the Supreme, the Supersoul, the Supreme Lord, is the aim and
object of all yoga processes. Similarly, philosophical research, the jndana
process, also aims at understanding the Supreme Brahman. These are
recognized processes, undoubtedly, but according to authoritative
description, they are not practical in this Iron Age of Kali. Therefore one
has to take to this process of hari-kirtana. Anyone can practice without
prequalification. One doesn’t have to study philosophy or Vedanta. This
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 153

was the purport of Lord Caitanya’s meeting with Prakasdananda Sarasvati.

When the Vedanta philosophy was thoroughly discussed between Lord
Caitanya and Prakasananda Sarasvati, Prakasananda Sarasvati first of all
asked Caitanya Mahaprabhu, ‘°‘I understand that You were a very good
scholar in Your early life. [Lord Caitanya was actually a very great
scholar. His name was Nimai Pandita, and at the age of sixteen He defeated a great scholar from Kashmir, Kesava Kasmiri.] And I understand
that You are a great Sanskrit scholar, and that especially in logic You are a
very learned scholar. You were also born in a brdhmana family, and now
You are a sannyasi. How is it that You are chanting and dancing and not
reading the Veddnta?’’ This was the first question asked by Prakasananda
Sarasvati, and Lord Caitanya replied, ‘Yes, the reason is that when I was
initiated by My spiritual master, he said that | am fool number one. ‘You
don’t discuss the Vedanta,’ he told Me. ‘You will simply spoil Your time.
Just take to this chanting of Hare Krsna, and You will be successful.’ ”’
That was his reply. Of course, Caitanya Mahaprabhu was not a fool, and
certainly the Vedanta is not for fools. One needs sufficient education, and
one must attain a certain status before he can understand the Vedanta. In
each and every word there are volumes of meanings, and there are many
commentaries by Sankaracarya and Ramanujacarya, huge volumes in
Sanskrit. But how can we understand Vedanta? It is not possible. It may
be possible for one person or two persons to understand, but for the mass
of people it is not possible. Nor is it possible to practice yoga. Therefore,
if one takes to Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s method, chanting Hare Krsna, the
first installment of gain will be ceto-darpana-marjanam: all the dirty
things will be cleansed from the heart simply by chanting. Chant. There
is nO expenditure, and there is no loss. If one simply chants for one week,
he will see how much he will progress in spiritual knowledge.

We are attracting many students simply by chanting, and they are understanding the entire philosophy and becoming purified. This Society’s
movement started only four years ago, in 1966, and we have so many
branches already. The American boys and girls are taking it very
seriously, and they are happy. Ask any one of them. Ceto-darpana-mar-.
janam. They are cleansing the dirty things from the heart, simply by
chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

The next point is bhava-mahddavagni-nirvapanam: as soon as the heart
is cleansed of all dirty things, then all the problems of material existence
are immediately solved. This world has been compared to davagni, which
means a blazing fire in the forest. In this material existence no one wants
154 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION |

unhappiness, but it comes by force. That is the law of material nature. No
one wants fire, but wherever we go in a city the fire brigade is always active. There is always fire. Similarly, there are many things that no one
wants. No one wants death—there is death. No one wants disease —there
is disease. No one wants old age—there is old age. They are there, against
our will, against our desire.

Thus we should consider the state of this material existence. This
human form of life is meant for understanding, not for wasting valuable
life like animals by eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. That is not
advancement of civilization. The Bhdgavatam says that this body is not
meant for working hard simply for sense gratification.

nayam deho deha-bhajam nrloke
kastan kaman arhate vid-bhujam ye
' [Bhdg. 5.5.1] 
To work very hard and satisfy oneself by sense gratification is the business of hogs, not human beings. The human being should learn tapasya.
Especially in India, so many great sages, so many great kings, and so
many brahmacarisand sannyasis have passed their lives in great tapasya in
order not to go further to sleep. Lord Buddha was a prince who gave up
everything and engaged himself in tapasya. This is life. When King
Bharata, under whose name India was named Bharata-varsa, was twentyfour years old, he gave up his kingdom, his young wife, and young
children and went away for tapasya. When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
was only twenty-four, He gave up His young wife, mother, everything.
There are many, many examples. India is the land of tapasya, but we are
forgetting that. Now we are making it the land of technology. It is surprising that India is now no longer propagating this tapasya, for India is the
land of dharma: dharma-ksetre kuruksetre.

But it is not only in India; everywhere in this age of iron everything is
degraded, degraded in this sense: pradyendlpdyusah sabhya kalav asmin
yuge janah [Bhdg. 1.1.10]. In this age of Kali the duration of life is
diminished, and men are not moved to understand self-realization, and if
they are, they are invariably misled by so many deceitful leaders. The age
is very corrupt. Therefore Caitanya Mahdprabhu’s process of chanting
Hare Krsna is the best and the simplest method.

harer nama harer nama
harer nadmaiva kevalam
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 155

kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha

‘*In this age of Kali there is no other religion than glorifying the Lord by
utterance of His holy name, and that is the injunction of all the revealed
scriptures. There is no other way, there is no other way, there is no other
way.” This verse appears in the Brhan-ndradiya Purana. Harer nama
harer nama harer namaiva kevalam. Simply chant Hare Krsna. There is no
other alternative. Kalau nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha. In this
age, Kali, there is no other alternative for self-realization. So we have to
accept it.

There is another similar verse in the Srimad-Bhdgavatam. In the
Twelfth Canto, Third Chapter, Partksit Maharaja was informed by
Sukadeva Goswami of the faults of this age, and now all the symptoms of
the age of Kali are apparent. In the conclusive portion, however,
Sukadeva Goswami said, kaler dosa-nidhe rajann asti hy eko mahan gunah:
‘“‘My dear king, this age, Kali, is full of faulty things, but there is one
good opportunity.’ What is that? Kirtanadd eva krsnasya mukta-sangah
param vrajet: ‘‘Simply by chanting this Hare Krsna mantra one can
become liberated and go back to Godhead.’”’

This is practical and authorized, and one can also test himself to see
how he is advancing simply by chanting. This Krsna consciousness
movement is not something new, something that we have introduced or
manufactured. It is authorized on the Vedic principles, authorized by
acaryas like Caitanya Mahaprabhu and others. And the method is very
simple; there is no loss. We are not charging anything, we are not asking
for fees and giving the people some secret mantra and promising them
that within six months they will become God. No. This is open for everyone—children, women, girls, boys, old people—everyone can chant and
see the results.

To further this end we not only are establishing New Vrndavana, our
farm project in West Virginia, but are establishing other spiritual communities, such as New Navadvipa and New Jagannatha Puri. We have
already started New Jagannatha Puri in San Francisco, and the Rathayatra festival is going on. This year there will be a great ceremony of
Ratha-yatra in London also. There will be three cars, for Jagannatha,
Subhadra, and Balarama, and they will be taken to the River Thames.
And America has imported New England and New York, so why not
New Vrndavana? We should especially establish this New Vrndavana because Lord Caitanya recommended, a@rddhyo bhagavan vrajesa-tanayas
156 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

tad-dhama vrnddvanam: ‘‘Krsna, the son of Nanda Mahdaraja, in the
Vrndavana-dhama of Vrajabhtimi, is the supreme worshipable Deity,
and His place Vrndavana is also worshipable.’’ The Western boys and
girls are taking to Krsna consciousness, and they should have a place like
Vrndavana. Swami Kirtanananda, who went to Vrndavana with me two
years ago, knows what Vrndavana is like, so I have instructed him to
construct at least seven temples. In Vrndavana, there are five thousand
temples of Radha-Krsna, but the most important temples are seven,
established by the Goswamis. Our program is to live in New Vrndavana,
depend on agriculture and cows as an economic solution, and peacefully
execute Krsna consciousness, chant Hare Krsna—that is the Vrndavana
scheme. Yuktdhdra-vihadrasya...yogo bhavati duhkha-ha |Bhagavadgita6.17]. This human form of life isn’t meant for increasing artificial
needs. We should be satisfied just to maintain the body and soul
together, and the rest of the time we should enhance our Krsna consciousness so that after leaving this body we will not have to take another
material body, but will be able to go back home, back to Godhead. That
should be the motto of human life.

Material life means eating, sleeping, mating, and defending, and
spiritual life means something more than this. This is also the difference
between animal life and human life. In animal life, the common formula
is eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. A dog eats, a man also eats. A
man sleeps, and a dog also sleeps. A man has sex life, and the dog also
has sex life. The dog defends in his own way, and man also defends in his
own way, maybe by atomic bombs. These four principles are common to
human beings and animals, and advancement of these four principles is
not human civilization but animal civilization. Human civilization means
athato brahma-jijndsa. In the Veddnta-stitra the first aphorism is athato
brahma-jijndsa: ‘“Now is the time for inquiry about Brahman.’’ That is
tamam, he is an animal because he lives according to these four principles, that’s all. He must be inquisitive to know what he is and why he is
put into these miseries of birth, death, old age, and disease. Is there any
remedy? These matters should be questioned. That is human life; that is
spiritual life.

Spiritual life means human life, and material life means animal life.
That’s all. We have to make the adjustments that are recommended in
the Bhagavad-gita. Yuktahdra-vihdrasya. For instance, because I am going
to be a Spiritual man does not mean that I shall give up eating. Rather,
my eating should be adjusted. The Bhagavad-gita describes what class of

 
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 157

food is first class, in goodness, and what class of food is in passion, and
third class, in ignorance. We have to raise ourselves to the sattvic (goodness) platform of human civilization, then revive our transcendental
consciousness, or Krsna consciousness. Everything is there in the
Sastras. Unfortunately we do not consult them.

evam prasanna-manaso
bhagavad-bhakti-yogatah
bhagavat-tattva-vijnanam
mukta-sangasya jayate
[Bhag. 1.2.20]

Unless one is liberated from the clutches of these three modes of
material nature, he cannot understand God. Prasanna-manasah. One
must be a Brahman-realized soul. Brahma-bhitah prasannatma na Socati
na kanksati (Bg. 18.54]. These injunctions are there, so one should take
advantage of these sdstras and preach. That is the responsibility of intelligent men. The mass of people know that God is great, but they do
not know how great God actually is. That we will find in the Vedic
literature. That is our duty in this iron age. That is hari-kirtana, param vijayate Sri-krsna-sankirtanam: glorification of the Supreme.
Meditation and the Self Within

Can meditation solve our everyday problems? Is there life after death? Can
drugs help us achieve self-realization? During a visit to South Africa, Srila
Prabhupdda answers these and other questions for interviewer Bill Faill of the
Durban Natal Mercury.

Srila Prabhupada: Krsna is a name for God which means “allattractive.’ Unless one is all-attractive he cannot be God. So Krsna consciousness means God consciousness. All of us are small particles of
God, equal in quality with Him. Our position as living entities is like that
of a small particle of gold in relation to a large quantity of gold.

Mr. Faill: Are we something like sparks in a fire?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Both the fire and the spark are fire, but one is
big, and the other is very small. Unlike the relationship between the
spark: and the fire, however, our relationship with God is eternal,
although at the present moment we have forgotten that relationship due
to contact with the material energy. We are facing so many problems only
because of this forgetfulness. If we can revive our original God consciousness, then we shall become happy. This is the sum and substance
of Krsna consciousness. It is the best process by which to revive our
original God consciousness. There are different processes of selfrealization, but in the present age of Kali, people are very fallen, and they
require the simple process of Krsna consciousness. Now they are thinking that so-called material advancement is the solution to their problems,
but this is not a fact. The real solution is to get out of the material condition entirely by becoming Krsna conscious. Because God is eternal, we
are also eternal, but in the material condition we are thinking, ““I am this
body,’’ and therefore we must repeatedly change from body to body.
This is due to ignorance. Actually we are not our bodies but spiritual
sparks, parts and parcels of God.

Mr. Faill: Then the body is just like a vehicle for the soul?

158
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 159

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. It is just like a motorcar. Just as you go from one
place to another ina car, so due to mental concoction in the material condition of life, we are going from one position to another, trying to
become happy. But nothing will make us happy unless we come to our
real position, which is that we are all parts and parcels of God and that our
real business is to associate with God and help all living entities by
cooperating with Him. Civilized human life is attained only after a long
evolution through 8,400,000 species of life. So if we don’t take advantage
of this civilized human life to understand who God is, who we are, and
what our relationship is, but instead simply waste our life like cats and
dogs, going here and there looking for sense gratification, then we will
have missed a great opportunity. The Krsna consciousness movement is
meant to teach people how to take full advantage of the human form of
life by trying to understand God and our relationship with Him.

Mr. Faill: If we don’t make the most of this life, do we get a second
chance in another life?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. According to your desires at the time of death,
you get another body. That body is not guaranteed to be a human body,
however. As I’ve already explained, there are 8,400,000 different forms
of life. You can enter any of them, according to your mental condition at
death. What we think of at the time of death depends on how we act during our life. As long as we are in material consciousness, our actions are
under the control of the material nature, which is being conducted in
three modes: goodness, passion, and ignorance. These modes are like the
three basic colors—yellow, red, and blue. Just as one can mix red,
yellow, and blue to produce millions of colors, the modes of nature are
being mixed to produce many varieties of life. To stop the repetition of
birth and death in different forms of life, we must transcend the covering
of material nature and come to the platform of pure consciousness. But if
we do not learn the transcendental science of Krsna consciousness, then
at death we must transfer to another body, either better or worse than
our present one. If we cultivate the mode of goodness, then we are promoted to the higher planetary system, where there is a better standard of
life. If we cultivate the mode of passion, then we will remain at the present stage. But if out of ignorance we commit sinful activities and violate
nature’s laws, then we will be degraded to animal or plant life. Then again
we must evolve to the human form, a process that may take millions of
years. Therefore a human being must be responsible. He must take advantage of the rare opportunity of human life by understanding his relationship with God and acting accordingly. Then he can get out of the
160 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

cycle of birth and death in different forms of life and go back home, back
to Godhead.

Mr. Faill: Do you think transcendental meditation is helping people?
Srila Prabhupada: They do not know what real meditation is. Their
meditation is simply a farce—another cheating process by the so-called
swamis and yogis. You’re asking me if meditation is helping people, but
do you know what meditation is?

Mr. Faill: A stilling of the mind—trying to sit in the center without
Swinging either way.

Srila Prabhupada: And what is the center?

Mr. Faill: I don’t know.

Srila Prabhupada: So everyone is talking very much about meditation,
but no one knows what meditation actually is. These bluffers use the
word ‘“‘meditation,’’ but they do not know the proper subject for meditation. They’re simply talking bogus propaganda.

Mr. Faill: Isn’t meditation valuable just to get people thinking right?
Srila Prabhupada: No. Real meditation means to achieve a state in
which the mind is saturated with God consciousness. But if you do not
know what God is, how can you meditate? Besides, in this age people’s
minds are so agitated that they cannot concentrate. I have seen this socalled meditation; they are simply sleeping and snoring. Unfortunately,
in the name of God consciousness or ‘‘self-realization,’’ many bluffers
are presenting nonstandard methods of meditation without referring to
the authorized books of Vedic knowledge. They are simply practicing
another type of exploitation.

Mr. Faill: What about some of the other teachers, like Ouspensky and
Gurdjieff? In the past they brought to the West a message similar to
yours.

Srila Prabhupada: We would have to study the particulars of their teachings to know whether they meet the Vedic standard. God consciousness
is a science, just like medical science or any other science. It cannot be
different because it is spoken by different men. Two plus two equals four
everywhere, never five, or three. That is science.

Mr. Faill: Do you feel that others may have possibly taught the genuine
method of God consciousness? |
Srila Prabhupada: Unless I study their teachings in detail, it would be
very difficult to say. There are so many bluffers.

Mr. Faill: Just doing it for money.

Srila Prabhupada: That’s all. They have no standard method. Therefore
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 161

we are presenting the Bhagavad-gita as it is, without any personal interpretation. This is standard.

Mr. Faill: Yes, if you begin dressing things up, you inevitably change
them.

Srila Prabhupada: Krsna consciousness is not a new process. It is very,
very old—and standard. It cannot be changed. As soon as you try to
change it, then the potency is lost. This potency is just like electricity. If
you want to generate electricity, you must follow the standard regulations, arranging all the negative and positive poles properly. You cannot
construct the generator whimsically and still produce electricity.
Similarly, there is a standard method of understanding Krsna conscious
philosophy from proper authorities. If we follow their instructions, then
the process will act. Unfortunately, one of the dangerous diseases of
modern man is that everyone wants to do things according to his own
whims. No one wants to follow the standard way. Therefore everyone is
failing, both spiritually and materially.

Mr. Faill: Is the Krsna consciousness movement growing?

Srila Prabhupada: Oh, yes, very much. You may be surprised to know
that we are selling books in the tens of thousands. We have about fifty
books, and many librarians and college professors are very appreciative
of them because until their publication there was no such literature in existence. It is a new contribution to the world.

Mr. Faill: Krsna consciousness seems to involve shaving the head and
wearing saffron robes. How can an ordinary man caught up in family life
practice Krsna consciousness?

Srila Prabhupada: The saffron robes and the shaven head are not essential, although they create a good mental situation, just as when a military
man is dressed properly he gets energy—he feels like a military man.
Does that mean that unless he is in uniform he cannot fight? No. In the
Same way, God consciousness cannot be checked—it can be revived in
any circumstances—but certain conditions are helpful. Therefore we
prescribe that you live in a certain way, dress in a certain way, eat in a certain way, and so on. These things are helpful for practicing Krsna consciousness, but they are not essential.

Mr. Faill: Then one can be a student of Krsna consciousness while going
about normal daily life?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Mr. Faill: How about drugs? Can they help in the process of God
realization?
162 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Srila Prabhupada: If drugs could help God realization, then drugs would
be more powerful than God. How can we accept that? Drugs are chemical
substances, which are material. How can something material help one
realize God, who is all-spiritual? It is impossible. What one experiences
from taking drugs is simply a kind of intoxication or hallucination; it is
not God realization.

Mr. Faill: Do do think the great mystics down through the ages have actually seen the spiritual spark you mentioned earlier?

Srila Prabhupada: What do you mean by ‘‘mystic’’?

Mr. Faill: It’s just a name given to people who have had an experience of
another level of reality. .
Srila Prabhupada: We don’t use the word ‘“‘mystic.’’ Our reality is God
realization, which occurs when we come to the spiritual platform. As long
as we have a bodily concept of life, our understanding is sense gratification because the body is made of senses. When we progress from the
bodily platform and we see the mind as the center of sense activity, we
take the mind as the final stage of realization. That is the mental platform. From the mental platform we may come to the intellectual platform, and from the intellectual platform we can rise to the transcendental
platform. Finally we can rise above even the transcendental platform and
come to the mature, spiritual platform. These are the stages of God
realization. However, in this age, because people are so fallen, the sdstras
[scriptures] give the special recommendation that people come directly
to the spiritual platform by chanting the holy names of God: Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare. If we cultivate this practice on the spiritual platform,
then immediately we can realize our spiritual identity. Then the process
of God realization becomes successful very quickly:

Mr. Faill: Today a lot of people are saying that we must look inward for
the truth rather than outward into the world of the senses.

Srila Prabhupada: Looking inward means knowing that you are a spirit
soul. Unless you understand that you are not the body but a soul, there is
no question of looking inward.

First we have to study, ‘“‘Am I this body, or am I something within this
body?’’ Unfortunately, this subject is not taught in any school, college,
or university. Everyone is thinking, ‘‘I am this body.’ For example, in
this country people everywhere are thinking, °‘I am South African, they
are Indian, they are Greek,’’ and so on. Actually, everyone in the whole
world is in the bodily conception of life. Krsna consciousness starts when
one is above this bodily conception.
Practicing Yoga in the Age of Quarrel 163

Mr. Faill: So the recognition of the spiritual spark comes first?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Recognizing the existence of the spirit soul
within the body is the first step. Unless one understands this simple fact,
there is no question of spiritual advancement.

Mr. Faill: Is it a question of just understanding it intellectually?

Srila Prabhupada: In the beginning, yes. There are two departments of
knowledge: theoretical and practical. First one must learn spiritual
science theoretically; then, by working on that spiritual platform, one
comes to the point of practical realization.

Unfortunately, today almost everyone is in the darkness of the bodily
conception of life. Therefore this movement is very important because it
can lift civilized men out of that darkness. As long as they are in the
bodily conception of life, they are no better than animals. ‘“‘I am a dog,”’
‘Tam acat,’’ “‘lamacow.’’ Animals think like this. As soon as someone
passes, a dog will bark, thinking, ‘‘I am a dog. I have been appointed here
as watchdog.” Similarly, if I adopt the dog’s mentality and challenge foreigners— °“Why have you come to this country? Why have you come to my
jurisdiction?’’—then what is the difference between the dog and me?

Mr. Faill: There is none. To change the subject a little, is it necessary to
follow certain eating habits to practice spiritual life?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, the whole process is meant to purify us, and eating is part of that purification. I think you have a saying, ‘‘You are what
you eat,’’ and that’s a fact. Our bodily constitution and mental atmosphere are determined according to how and what we eat. Therefore
the sdstras recommend that to become Krsna conscious, you should eat
remnants of food left by Krsna. If a tuberculosis patient eats something
and you eat the remnants, you will be infected with tuberculosis.
Similarly, if you eat Arsna-prasdda, then you will be infected with Krsna
consciousness. Thus our process is that we don’t eat anything immediately. First we offer the food to Krsna, then we eat it. This helps us
advance in Krsna consciousness. .

Mr. Faill: You are all vegetarians?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, because Krsna is a vegetarian. Krsna can eat
anything because He is God, but in the Bhagavad-gita [9.26] He says, ‘‘If
one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit, or water, I
will accept it.”’ He never says, ‘“Give Me meat and wine.”’

Mr. Faill: How about the tobacco question?

Srila Prabhupada: Tobacco is also an intoxicant. We are already intoxicated by being in the bodily conception of life, and if we increase the intoxication, then we are lost.
164 | THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Mr. Faill: You mean things like meat, alcohol, and tobacco just reinforce
bodily consciousness?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Suppose you have a disease and you want to be
cured. You have to follow the instructions of a physician. If he says,
‘“*Don’t eat this; eat only this,’’ you have to follow his prescription.
Similarly, we also have a prescription for being cured of the bodily conception of life: chanting Hare Krsna, hearing about Krsna’s activities,
and eating krsna-prasdda. This treatment is the process of Krsna
consciousness.

Lae eth mine na MR ae cin cA ae ie seme A

i
2
i
|
i
H
i

 
VI.

Finding

the Cure for
Today's Social Ills
Crime: Why and What to Do”

In this July 1975 interview, Chicago Police Department media relations man
Lt. David Mozee asks about curbing the upward-spiraling U.S. crime rate.
Srila Prabhupdda replies, “If human beings are not given the facility to learn
about God, then they remain on the level of cats and dogs. You cannot have
peace ina society of cats and dogs... . The thief and murderer already know
the law, yet they still commit violent crimes due to their unclean hearts. So our
process is to cleanse the heart.”’

Lieutenant Mozee: I understand you have some ideas that could help us
in our efforts to prevent crime. I’d be very interested to hear them.
Srila Prabhupada: The difference between a pious man and a criminal is
that one is pure in heart and the other is dirty. This dirt is like a disease in
the form of uncontrollable lust and greed in the heart of the criminal.
Today people in general are in this diseased condition, and thus crime is
very widespread. When the people become purified of these dirty things,
crime will disappear. The simplest process of purification is to assemble
in congregation and chant the holy names of God. This is called
sankirtana and is the basis of our Krsna consciousness movement. So, if
you want to stop crime, then you must gather as many people as possible
for mass sankirtana. This congregational chanting of the holy name of
God will dissipate all the dirty things in everyone’s heart. Then there will
be no more crime.

Lieutenant Mozee: Do you have any feelings about crime here in the
United States as opposed to the crime in your own country of India?
Srila Prabhupada: What is your definition of crime?

Lieutenant Mozee: Any trampling on the rights of one person by
another person.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Our definition is the same. In the Upanisads it is
said, is@vasyam idam sarvam: ‘‘Everything belongs to God.’’ So, everyone has the right to utilize whatever is allotted to him by God, but one
may not encroach upon others’ property. If one does so, he becomes a
criminal. Actually the first crime is that you Americans are thinking this

166
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 167

land of America is yours. Although two hundred years ago it was not
yours, you have come from other parts of the world and claimed it as
your land. Actually it is God’s land, and therefore it belongs to everyone,
since everyone is a child of God. But the vast majority of people have no
conception of God. Practically speaking, everyone is godless. Therefore
they should be educated to love God. In America, your government has
a slogan: ‘‘In God we trust.”’ Is that correct? ,

Lieutenant Mozee: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: But where is the education about God? To trust is
very good, but simple trust will not endure unless it is backed up with
scientific knowledge of God. One may know that he has a father, but
unless he knows who his father is, his knowledge is imperfect. And that
education in the science of God is lacking.

Lieutenant Mozee: Do you feel that it’s lacking only here in the United
States?

Srila Prabhupada: No. Everywhere. The age we live in is called Kaliyuga, the age of forgetting God. It is an age of misunderstanding and
quarrel, and the people’s hearts are filled with dirty things. But God is so
powerful that if we chant His holy name we become purified, just as my
disciples have become purified of their bad habits. Our movement is
based on this principle of chanting the holy name of God. We give everyone the opportunity, without any distinction. They can come to our temple, chant the Hare Krsna mantra, take a little prasdda* as refreshment,
and gradually become purified. So if the governmental authorities give us
some facilities, then we can hold mass sankirtana. Then, without a doubt,
the whole society will change.

Lieutenant Mozee: If I understand you correctly, sir, you are saying that
we should emphasize a return to religious principles.

Srila Prabhupada: Certainly. Without religious principles what is the
difference between a dog and a man? Man can understand religion, but a
dog cannot. That is the difference. So if human society remains on the
level of dogs and cats, how can you expect a peaceful society? If you
bring a dozen dogs and put them together in a room, will it be possible to
keep them peaceful? Similarly, if human society is filled with men whose
mentality is on the level of dogs, how can you expect peace?
Lieutenant Mozee: If some of my questions sound disrespectful, it is
only because I do not completely understand your religious beliefs. I
mean no disrespect whatsoever.

*Food first offered to the Supreme Lord.
168 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Srila Prabhupada: No, it is not a question of my religious beliefs. I am
Simply pointing out the distinction between human life and animal life.
Animals cannot possibly learn anything about God, but human beings
can. However, if human beings are not given the facility to learn about
God, then they remain on the level of cats and dogs. You cannot have
peace in a society of cats and dogs. Therefore, it is the duty of the governmental authorities to see that people are taught how to become God
conscious. Otherwise, there will be trouble, because without God consciousness there is no difference between a dog and a man: the dog eats,
we eat; the dog sleeps, we sleep; a dog has sex, we have sex; a dog tries to
defend itself, and we also try to defend ourselves. These are the common
factors. The only difference is that a dog cannot be instructed about his
relationship with God, but a man can.

Lieutenant Mozee: Wouldn’t peace be a precursor to a return to
religion? Must we not first have peace?

Srila Prabhupada: No, no, that is the difficulty. At the present moment,
no one actually knows the meaning of religion. Religion means to abide
by the laws of God, just as good citizenship means to abide by the laws of
the government. Because no one has any understanding of God, no one
knows the laws of God or the meaning of religion. This is the present
status of people in today’s society. They are forgetting religion, taking it
to be a kind of faith. Faith may be blind faith. Faith is not the real description of religion. Religion means the laws given by God, and anyone who
follows those laws is religious, whether a Christian, a Hindu, or a
Muslim.

Lieutenant Mozee: With all due respect, isn’t it true that in India, where
religious customs have been followed for centuries upon centuries, we
are seeing not a return to but a drawing away from spiritual life?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, but it is due only to bad leadership. Otherwise,
the vast majority of the Indian people are fully conscious of God, and
they try to follow the laws of God. Here in the West, even big college professors do not believe in God or in life after death. But in India, even the
poorest man believes in God and in a next life. He knows that if he commits sins he will suffer and if he acts piously he will enjoy. To this day, if
there is a disagreement between two villagers, they will go to the temple
to settle it, because everyone knows that the opposite parties will hesitate
to speak lies before the Deities. So in most respects, India is still eightypercent religious. That is the special privilege of taking birth in India, and
the special responsibility also. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has said,
Finding the Cure for Today's Social Ills 169

bharata-bhimite haila manusya-janma ya 'ra
janma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara
[Caitanya-caritamrta, Adi 9.41]

Anyone who has taken birth in India should make his life perfect by
becoming Krsna conscious. Then he should distribute Krsna consciousness all over the world.

Lieutenant Mozee: Sir, there is a Christian parable that says it is easier
for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to come
before the throne of God. Do you think the wealth of the United States
and other Western countries is a block to spiritual faith?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Too much wealth is a block. Krsna states in the
Bhagavaa-gita (2.44):

bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam
tayapahrta-cetasam

vyavasayatmika buddhih
samadhau na vidhiyate

If one is materially very opulent, he forgets God. Therefore too much
material wealth is a disqualification for understanding God. Although
there is no absolute law that only the poor man can understand God,
generally if one is extraordinarily rich, his only ambition is to acquire
money, and it is difficult for him to understand spiritual teachings.
Lieutenant Mozee: In America, those who belong to the Christian faith
also believe these things. I don’t see any vast differences between the
Spiritual beliefs of one religious group and another.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, the essence of all religion is the same. Our proposal is that whatever religious system one follows, he should try to understand God and love Him. If you are a Christian, we do not say, ‘““That
is no good; you must become like us.’’ Our proposition is that whether
you are a Christian, Muslim, or Hindu, simply try to understand God and
love Him.

Lieutenant Mozee: If I could return to my original purpose for coming,
might I ask what advice you could give to assist us in reducing crime? I
recognize that the first and foremost way would be a return to God, as
you say—there’s no doubt about that—but is there something that we
could immediately do to diminish this spreading criminal mentality?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes. As I’ve already outlined in the beginning of our
170 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

talk, you should give us the facility to chant the holy name of God and
distribute prasadda. Then there will be a tremendous change in the
population. I came alone from India, and now I have many followers.
What did I do? I asked them to sit down and chant the Hare Krsna
mantra, and afterward I distributed a little prasdda. If this is done on a
mass scale, the entire society will become very pleasing. This is a fact.
Lieutenant Mozee: Would you want to start the program in an area of
affluence or an area of poverty?

Srila Prabhupada: We do not draw such distinctions. Any place easily
available to all kinds of men would be very suitable to hold sankirtana.
There is no restriction that only the poor men need the benefit but the
rich do not. Everyone needs to be purified. Do you think criminality exists only in the poorer section of society?

Lieutenant Mozee: No. But I meant to ask whether there would be more
of a beneficial influence— more of a strengthening of the community —if
the program were held in a poorer area rather than an affluent area.
Srila Prabhupada: Our treatment is for the spiritually diseased person.
When a person is afflicted with a disease, there are no distinctions between a poor man and a rich man. They are both admitted to the same
hospital. Just as the hospital should be in a place where both the poor
man and the rich man can easily come, the location of the sankirtana
facility should be easily accessible to all. Since everyone is materially infected, everyone should be able to take advantage.

The difficulty is that the rich man thinks he’s perfectly healthy,
although he’s the most diseased of all. But as a policeman, you well know
that there’s criminality among rich men and poor men alike. So our
chanting process is for everyone because it cleanses the heart, regardless
of the man’s opulence or poverty. The only way to permanently change
the criminal habit is to change the heart of the criminal. As you well
know, many thieves are arrested numerous times and put into jail.
Although they know that if they commit theft they will go to jail, still
they are forced to steal because of their unclean hearts. Therefore without cleansing the heart of the criminal, you cannot stop crime simply by
more stringent law enforcement. The thief and the murderer already
know the law, yet they still commit violent crimes due to their unclean
hearts. So our process is to cleanse the heart. Then all the troubles of this
material world will be solved.

Lieutenant Mozee: That’s a very difficult task, sir.
Srila Prabhupada: It is not difficult. Simply invite everyone: ‘‘Come,
chant Hare Krsna, dance, and take sumptuous prasdda.’’ What is the
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills | 171

difficulty? We are doing this at our centers, and people are coming. But
because we have very little money, we can hold sankirtana only on a
small scale. We invite everyone, and gradually people are coming to our
centers and becoming devotees. If the government would give us a large
facility, however, we could expand unlimitedly. And the problem is big;
otherwise why are there national news articles asking what to do? No
Civil state wants this criminality. That’s a fact. But the leaders do not
know how to stop it. If they listen to us, however, we can give them the
answer. Why crime? Because people are godless. And what to do? Chant
Hare Krsna and take prasada. If you like, you can adopt this process of
sankirtana. Otherwise, we will continue conducting it on a small scale.
We are just like a poor medical man with a small private practice who
could open a big hospital if he were given the facility. The government is
the executor. If they take our advice and adopt the process of sankirtana,
then the problem of crime will be solved.

Lieutenant Mozee: There are many Christian organizations in the
United States that give the holy communion. Why doesn’t this work?
Why is this not cleansing the heart?

Srila Prabhupada: To speak frankly, I find it difficult to find even one
real Christian. The so-called Christians do not abide by the Bible’s order.
One of the ten commandments in the Bible is, ‘“Thou shalt not kill.’’ But
where is that Christian who does not kill by eating the flesh of the cow?
The process of chanting the Lord’s holy name and distributing prasdda
will be effective if carried out by persons who are actually practicing
religion. My disciples are trained to strictly follow religious principles,
and therefore their chanting of the holy name of God is different from
others’. Theirs is not simply a rubber-stamped position. They have
realized the purifying power of the holy name through practice.
Lieutenant Mozee: Sir, isn’t the difficulty that although a small circle of
priests and devotees may follow the religious principles, those on the
fringe deviate and cause trouble? For example, assume that the Hare
Krsna movement grows to gigantic proportions, as Christianity has.
Wouldn’t you then have a problem with people on the fringe of the
movement who professed to be followers but were actually not?

Srila Prabhupada: That possibility is always there, but all I am saying is
that if you are not a true Christian, then your preaching will not be effective. And because we are strictly following religious principles, our
preaching will be effective in spreading God consciousness and alleviating the problem of crime.

Lieutenant Mozee: Sir, let me thank you for your time. I will deliver this

 

 
172 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

tape recording to my superiors. Hopefully, it will be effective, as you are
effective.
Srila Prabhupada: Thank you very much.
 

Before leaving India for America, Srila Prabhupada spent nearly a decade in his humble quarters (1) at the historic Radha-Damodara
temple, in Lord Krsna’s land of Vrndavana.
Here he studied and began translating the Vedic
literatures, kept the memory of his spiritual
master (whose portrait graces the wall), and
made plans for executing his spiritual master’s
order— “Spread Krsna consciousness
throughout the English-speaking world.” “His
Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada is doing great work," Prime
Minister Shastri said during this time (2), “and
his books are significant contributions to the
salvation of mankind.” In 1965 Srimati Sumati
Morarjee (3), the head of India’s largest
shipping firm, gave Srila Prabhupdda

free passage to America.

 
rR) hn Sa. ~
‘ “An }
‘hea . ~

. .
TPR e

 
‘sa

 

 

“Books are the basis of the Krsna consciousness movement,” Srila Prabhupada often said.
Here we see him (1) studying the SrimadBhagavatam, Nairobi 1975; (2) inspecting an
early Bhaktivedanta Book Trust pressroom,
New York 1971; (3) translating the SrimadBhagavatam, New York 1974; (4) viewing the
work of the BBT art academy, New York 1974;
and (§) examining a newly printed volume of
the Bhagavatam, Los Angeles 1976. Overa
twelve-year period Srila Prabhupada left the
world more than eighty books on the science of
self-realization (6). His books have already
been translated into twenty-five major
languages.
 
 

   
 
 
 
 
  
  

In just twelve years Srila Prabhupdda circled the
globe fourteen times. His mission of spreading
Krsna consciousness took him everywhere —
from Mexico (1) to Moscow (2), from South
Indian lecture programs (3) to Scandinavian
college classrooms (4), from Hamburg (5) to
the Hawaiian Islands (6). Srila Prabhupada
brought Krsna consciousness to six continents
and more than forty countries.
“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy, ”’ say the
Vedic literatures, ‘the easiest way to achieve
self-realization is to chant the Lord’s holy
names.” As always, Srila Prabhupdda taught
by his own example (1). Also, he established
Golden Avatar Productions, a twenty-fourtrack recording studio (2), to send out the
message of Krsna consciousness through
records, tapes, and the broadcast media. Srila
Prabhupada looked not only to his disciples but
to their children and their children’s children to
perpetuate the chanting of the holy names (3).
In 1972 he introduced Gurukula, the Vedic
system of primary and secondary education (4).

 
 
All over the world, people wanted to meet Srila Prabhupada. Here we see (1) leading Londoners congratulating him after an address in 1969, (2) an English nun asking him about Krsna and Christ in
1973, (3) the mayor of Geneva greeting him in 1974, and (4) German author Baron Durkheim
walking with him, also in 1974.

 
 
 

»
» MA
thei, 7?

= ‘ eh
ee a SS 4
eee ee : ; a
»~_ ¥ é ’ 4 ‘
: ” Pe 8 ee seq 1 ir = ” _— P
5 an tng Oe + eet .
eS tian nus es Ape *
ers le ei

Srila Prabhupada gave the world not only ideas but cultural institutions —for instance, Krsna conscious
temples where people can chant the names of the Lord, feast on delicious vegetarian food offered to
Him, and learn the science of self-realization. Among the more than one hundred temples Srila Prabhupada founded are (1) ISKCON’s Western world-headquarters in Los Angeles, (2) ISKCON’s European headquarters just outside London, and (3) the Krsna-Balarama Temple and International
Guesthouse in Vrndavana, India. In addition, Srila Prabhupada introduced authentic Vedic festivals —
notably Ratha-yatra, the “Festival of the Chariots. ’’ This two-thousand-year-old event literally brings
the temple to the people, and Srila Prabhupada was always eager to take part, as here

(4) in San Francisco 1969, (5) in London 1973, and (6) in New York 1976.
 
 

Srila Prabhupada developed a variety of
programs for introducing Krsna consciousness,
such as (1) traveling bus parties for distributing
books and giving lectures on college campuses,
(2) vegetarian restaurants where everyone can
taste delicious Indian dishes offered to Lord
Krsna, (3) the ancient Vedic system of worshiping Lord Krsna’s Deity form, (4) a diorama
project for showcasing the science of selfrealization, and Gurukula, a worldwide federation of schools for self-realization. In 1975 Srila
Prabhupada laid the cornerstone for the main
school, in Vrndavana, and by 1977 the construction was finished (S).
- jae =a a oe
Perel are

’
~<a

 
 

To insure the success of the Krsna consciousness movement, from the start Srila Prabhupada generously gave his personal guidance. He
wrote detailed letters of instruction (1), he accepted thousands of disciples (2), he lectured
tirelessly on the science of self-realization

(3), and he was pleased to answer all his disciples’ questions (4). What Srila Prabhupada
said of his own spiritual master also holds true
for Srila Prabhupada— ‘He lives forever by his
divine instructions. ”’

 
Can We Keep Society
From Going to the Dogs?

Srila Prabhupdda speaks out to India’s Bhavan’s Journal: “A dog comes
when there are some eatables; I say ‘Hut!’ and he goes away. But again he
comes—he has no memory. So when our memory of God is reducing, that
means that our human qualities are reducing. ... There is no religion, simply
a dog’s race. The dog is running on four legs, and you are running on four
wheels—that’s all. And you think that the four-wheel race is advancement of
civilization!”

Interviewer: The first question is this: ‘‘Is the influence of religion on
the wane? And if so, does this factor account for the increase in corruption and the widespread deterioration of moral values?”’

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, religion is on the wane. This is predicted in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam [12.2.1]:

tatas canudinam dharmah
satyam Saucam ksama daya
kalena balina rajan
nanksyaty ayur balam smrtih

‘‘In the Kali-yuga (the present age of quarrel and hypocrisy] the following things will diminish: religion, truthfulness, cleanliness, mercy, dura-tion of life, bodily strength, and memory.”’

These are human assets, which make the human being distinct from
the animal. But these things will decline. There will be no mercy, there
will be no truthfulness, memory will be short, and the duration of life will
be cut short. Similarly, religion will vanish. That means that gradually we
will come to the platform of animals.

Interviewer: Religion will vanish? We’ll become animals?

Srila Prabhupada: Especially when there is no religion, it is simply
animal life. Any common man can distinguish that the dog does not
understand what religion is. The dog is also a living being, but
he is not interested in understanding the Bhagavad-gita or the SrimadBhagavatam. He is not interested. That is the distinction between man
and dog: the animal is not interested.

173
174 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

So when the human beings become uninterested in religious things,
then they are animals. And how can there be happiness or peace in
animal society? They want to keep people like animals, and they are
making a United Nations. How is it possible? United animals, society for
united animals? These things are going on.

Interviewer: Do you see any hopeful signs?

Srila Prabhupada: At least they have detected that religion is declining.
That is good. ‘‘Declining’’ means they are going to be animals. In logic it
is said that man is a rational animal. When the rationality is missing, then
he is simply an animal, not a human being. In human society either you
become Christian, Muhammadan, Hindu, or Buddhist; it doesn’t matter.
There must be some system of religion. Human society without religion
is animal society. This is a plain fact. Why are people so unhappy now?
Because there is no religion. They are neglecting religion.

One gentleman has written me that Tolstoy once said, ‘‘Unless
dynamite is put underneath the church, there cannot be any peace.”’
Even now the Russian government is very strictly against God consciousness because they think that religion has spoiled the whole social
atmosphere.

Interviewer: It seems there could be some truth in that.

Srila Prabhupada: The religious system might have been misused, but
that does not mean that religion should be avoided. Real religion should
be taken. It does not mean that because religion has not been properly
executed by the so-called priests, religion should be rejected. If my eye is
giving me some trouble on account of a cataract, it does not mean that
the eye should be plucked out. The cataract should be removed. That is
Krsna consciousness.

Interviewer: I think history shows that many people have misused
religion. Isn’t that a fact?

Srila Prabhupada: These people have no conception of God, and they
are preaching religion. What is religion? Dharmam tu sdksad bhagavatpranitam: “‘The path of religion is directly enunciated by the Supreme
Lord.’ They have no conception of God—they do not know what God
is—and they are professing some religion. How long can it go on artificially? It will deteriorate.

That has become the present condition. They have no idea of God, so
how will they know what is the order of God? Religion means the order
of God. For example, law means the order of the state. If there is no
State, then where is the order? We have a clear conception of God—
Krsna. He is giving His order, and we accept it. It is clear religion. If there

 
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 175

is no God, no conception of God, no order of God, then where is
religion? If there is no government, then where is the law?
Interviewer: Well, there wouldn’t be any law. It would be an outlaw
society.
Srila Prabhupada: Outlaw—everyone is an outlaw, manufacturing his
own concocted system of religion. That is going on.

Just ask—in any religious system, what is their conception of God?
Can anyone tell clearly? No one can tell. But we shall immediately say,

venum kvanantam aravinda-dalayataksam
barhavatamsam asitambuda-sundarangam

kandarpa-koti-kamaniya-visesa-sobham
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami

‘I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is adept in playing on His
flute, whose blooming eyes are like lotus petals, whose head is bedecked
with a peacock’s feather, whose figure of beauty is tinged with the hue of
blue clouds, and whose unique loveliness charms millions of Cupids.”’
[Brahma-samhita 5.30] Immediately, we can give a description of God.

If there is no idea of God, then what kind of religion is that?

Interviewer: I don’t know.
Srila Prabhupada: It is bogus. People have no conception of God, and
therefore they have no understanding of religion. That is the decline, and
because religion is declining, the human beings are becoming more and
more like animals.

‘*Animal’’ means that one has no memory. A dog comes when there
are some eatables; I say ‘‘Hut!’’ and he goes away. But again he comes—
he has no memory. So when our memory of God is reducing, that means
that our human qualities are reducing. In the Kali-yuga these human
qualities will be reduced. That means that people are becoming like cats
and dogs.

Interviewer: Here’s the second question: ‘“The traditional charge against
Vedic culture is that it is fatalistic, that it makes people slaves to the belief
in predestination, and that it therefore inhibits progress. How far is this
charge true?”’

Srila Prabhupada: What is that progress? Is a dog’s jumping progress? Is »
that progress? A dog is running here and there on four legs, and you are
running here and there on the four wheels of the automobile. Is that
progress? That is not the Vedic system. According to the Vedic system,
the human being has a certain amount of energy, and since the human
176 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

being has better consciousness than the animals, the energy of the
human beings is more valuable than the energy of the animals.
Interviewer: Probably no one would dispute that the human being has
more freedom or, I suppose, responsibility than the animals.

Srila Prabhupada: So human energy should be utilized for spiritual advancement, not that the energy should be employed to compete with the
dog. The saintly person is not busy like the dog. Today people think that
‘‘dog-ness’’ is life, but actual life is spiritual progress. Therefore, the
Vedic literature says,

tasyaiva hetoh prayateta kovido
na labhyate yad bhramatadm upary adhah
tal labhyate duhkhavad anyatah sukham
kalena sarvatra gabhira-ramhasa

‘Persons who are actually intelligent and philosophically inclined should
endeavor only for that purposeful end which is not obtainable even by
wandering from the topmost planet [Brahmaloka] down to the lowest
planet [Patala]. As far as happiness derived from sense enjoyment is concerned, it can be obtained automatically in the course of time, just as in
the course of time we obtain miseries even though we do not desire
them.”’ [Srimad-Bhdgavatam 1.5.18]

Interviewer: Could you explain that a little further?

Srila Prabhupada: The human being should exert his energy for that
thing which he did not get in many, many lives. In many, many lives the
soul has been in the forms of dogs, or demigods, or cats, birds, beasts,
and many others. There are 8,400,000 different types of bodies. So this
transmigration of the soul is going on. The business in every case is sense
gratification.

Interviewer: Which means?

Srila Prabhupada: For example, the dog is busy for sense gratification:
where is food, where is shelter, where is a female, where is defense? The
man is also doing the same business, in different ways. This business is
going on, life after life. Even a small insect is trying for the same thing.
Birds, beasts, fish—everywhere the same struggle is going on. Where is
food, where is sex, where is shelter, and how to defend? The Vedic
literature says that these things we have done for many, many lives, and
that if we don’t get out of this struggle for existence, we will have to do
them again for many, many lives.

Interviewer: I’m beginning to see.

 
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 177

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, so these things should be stopped. Therefore,
Prahlada Maharaja makes this statement:

sukham aindriyakam daitya
deha-yogena dehinam

sarvatra labhyate daivad
yatha duhkham ayatnatah

**My dear friends born of demonic families, the happiness perceived with
reference to the sense objects by contact with the body can be obtained in
any form of life, according to one’s past fruitive activities. Such happiness is automatically obtained without endeavor, just as we obtain
distress.’’ [Bhdg. 7.6.3]

A dog has a body, and I have a body. So, my sex pleasure and the dog’s
sex pleasure—there is no difference. The pleasure derived out of sex is
the same. A dog is not afraid of having sex pleasure on the street before
everyone, and we hide it. That’s all. People are thinking that to have sex
pleasure in a nice apartment is advanced. However, that is not advanced.
And they are making a dog’s race for this so-called advancement. People
do not know that according to whatever kind of body one has acquired,
the pleasure is already stored ap.

Interviewer: What do you mean, ‘‘the pleasure is already stored up’’?
Srila Prabhupada: That is called destiny. A pig has got a certain type of
body, and his eatable is the stool. You cannot change it. The pig will not
like to eat halvah [a sweetmeat made of wheat toasted in butter]. It is not
possible. Because he has a particular type of body, he must eat like that.
Can any scientist improve the standard of living: of the pig?
Interviewer: | doubt it.

Srila Prabhupada: Therefore, Prahlada Maharaja says that it is already
stored up. The pleasure is basically the same, but a little different according to the body. The uncivilized man in the jungle is having the same
thing.

Now people are thinking that civilization means constructing skyscraper buildings. But Vedic civilization says, No, that is not advancement. The real advancement of human life is self-realization, how much
you have realized your se/f. Not that you have constructed skyscraper
buildings.

Interviewer: But wouldn’t what you’re saying make sense to most
people?
Srila Prabhupada: Sometimes people misunderstand. In a high court, a
178 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

judge is sitting soberly, apparently doing nothing, and he is getting a high
salary. Someone else is thinking, “‘I am working so hard in the same
court, rubber-stamping—and not getting one tenth the salary of the
judge.’ He is thinking, ‘‘I am so busy, working so hard, and I am not getting as good a salary as the man who is just sitting on the bench.’’ The
Situation is like that: the Vedic civilization is meant for self-realization,
not for a dog’s race.

Interviewer: Still, isn’t it usually considered honorable to work hard, to
Struggle, and eventually ‘‘get ahead’’ in life?

Srila Prabhupada: The karmis, fruitive workers, have been described in
the Bhagavad-gita as midhas, asses. Why are they compared to the asses?
Because the ass works very hard with loads on his back, and in return his
master gives him only a little morsel of grass. He stands at the door of the
washerman and eats grass while again the washerman loads his back. He
doesn’t have the sense to think, “If I go out of the cottage of the washerman, I can get grass anywhere. Why am I carrying so much?’’
Interviewer: That brings to mind some people I know.

Srila Prabhupada: The fruitive worker is like that. He is very busy in the
office, and if you want to see him he will say, ‘‘I am very busy.’’ So what
is the result of your being so busy? He takes two pieces of toast and one
cup of tea. And for this purpose you are so busy? He does not know why
he is busy. In the account books he will find that the balance was one
million dollars and now it has become two million. He is satisfied with
that, but he will take only two pieces of toast and one cup of tea, and still
he will work very hard. That is what is meant by karmi. Asses—they work
like asses, without any aim in life.

But Vedic civilization is different. The accusation is not correct—
people in Vedic civilization are not at all lazy. They are busy for a higher
subject matter. Prahlada Maharaja stresses that this busy-ness is so important that it should begin from one’s very childhood. Kaumdra dcaret
prajnah: one should not lose a second’s time. That is Vedic civilization.
The asses see, ‘“These men are not working like I am’’—like dogs and
asses—and they consider that we are escaping. Yes, escaping your fruitless endeavor. The Vedic civilization is meant for self-realization.
Interviewer: Could you give us more of an idea what the Vedic civilization is like?

Srila Prabhupada: The Vedic civilization begins from the varndsrama
system. In the varndsrama system there is this arrangement: brdhmanas
lintellectuals, advisors], ksatriyas [administrators], vaisyas [merchants,
farmers], stdras [workers], brahmacdaris [celibate students], grhasthas
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 179

[householders], vdnaprasthas [retired married people], and sannyasis
[renounced monks].

The ultimate goal is that Krsna, the Supreme Lord, should be
worshiped. So if you worship Krsna, then you fulfill all your occupational
duties, either as a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, stidra, brahmacari, anything. Take to it immediately —take to Krsna consciousness. This is so
important.

Interviewer: If people really knew about a life-style that was more
natural, more fulfilling, what would be the problem? They actually
would, as you say, take to it.

Srila Prabhupada: But they do not know, and therefore there is no
religion, simply a dog’s race. The dog is running on four legs, and you are
running on four wheels—that’s all. And you think that the four-wheel
race is the advancement of civilization.

Therefore, modern civilization is practically said to do nothing. What
ever is obtainable by destiny you will get, wherever you are. Rather, take
to Krsna consciousness. The example is given by Prahlada Maharaja that
you do not want anything distasteful and yet it comes upon you.
Similarly, even if you do not want happiness which you are destined, it
will come upon you. You should not waste your energy for material happiness. You cannot get more material happiness than you are destined.
Interviewer: How can you be so sure of that?
Srila Prabhupada: How shall I believe it? Because you get some distressful condition although you do not want it. For instance, President
Kennedy died by the hand of his own countryman. Who wanted it, and
why did it come? He was a great man, he was protected by so many, and
still he was destined to be killed. Who can protect you? .

So if the distressful condition comes upon me by destiny, then the opposite position —happiness—will also come. Why shall I waste my time
for this rectification? Let me use my energy for Krsna consciousness.
That is intelligent. You cannot check your destiny. Everyone will experience a certain amount of happiness and a certain amount of distress.
No one is enjoying uninterrupted happiness. That is not possible.

Just as you cannot check your distress, so you cannot check your happiness. It will come automatically. So don’t waste your time for these
things. Rather, you should utilize your time for advancing in Krsna
consciousness.

Interviewer: Would a Krsna conscious person not try for progress?
Srila Prabhupada: The thing is that if you try for progress vainly, then
what is the use of that? If it is a fact that you cannot change your destiny,
180 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

then what is the use of trying? We will be satisfied with the amount of
happiness and distress we are destined. |

Vedic civilization is meant for realization of God. That is the point.
You'll still find in India that during important festivals many millions of
people are coming to take bath in the Ganges, because they are interested
in how to become liberated. They are not lazy. They are going thousands
of miles, two thousand miles away to take bath in the Ganges. They are
not lazy, but they are not busy in the dog’s race. Rather, they are busy
right from their childhood trying to become self-realized. Kaumdra
acaret prajno dharman bhagavatan iha. They are so busy that they want to
begin the business from their very childhood. So it is the wrong conception to think that they are lazy.

Interviewer: Then the question may be raised that if destiny cannot be
checked, then why not let every newborn child simply run around like an
animal, and whatever is destined to happen to him will happen?

Srila Prabhupada: No, the advantage is that you can train him spiritually. Therefore it is said, tasyaiva hetoh prayateta kovidah: you should
engage your energy for self-realization. Ahaituky apratihata: devotional
service, Krsna consciousness, cannot be checked. Just as material
destiny cannot be checked, your advancement in spiritual life cannot be
checked if you endeavor for it.

Actually, Krsna will change destiny—but only for His devotee. He
says, aham tvam sarva-papebhyo moksayisyami: ‘"I shall give you all protection from all reactions of sinful activities.”’ [Bhagavad-gitd 18.66]

For instance, if one is condemned by the law court to be hanged, no
one can check it. Even the same judge who has given this verdict cannot
check it. But if the defendant begs for the mercy of the king, who is above
all the laws, then the king can check it.

Therefore, our business is to surrender to Krsna. If we artificially want
to be more happy by economic development, that is not possible. So
many men are working so hard, but does it mean that everyone will become a Henry Ford or a Rockefeller? Everyone is trying his best. Mr.
Ford’s destiny was to become a rich man, but does it mean that every
other man who has worked as hard as Ford will become a rich man like
Ford? No. This is practical. You cannot change your destiny simply by
working hard like an ass or a dog. But you can utilize that energy for improving your Krsna consciousness.

Interviewer: Exactly what is Krsna consciousness? Could you tell us
more?
Srila Prabhupada: Love of God—that is Krsna consciousness. If you
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 181

have not learned to love God, then what is the meaning of your religion?
When you are actually on the platform of love of God, you understand
your relationship with God—‘‘I am part and parcel of God.’’ Then you
extend your love to the animal, also. If you actually love God, then your
love for the insect is also there. You understand, ‘‘This insect has a different body, but he is also part and parcel of my father; therefore, he is
my brother.’’ Then you cannot maintain a slaughterhouse. If you maintain a slaughterhouse and disobey the order of Christ, ‘“Thou shalt not
kill,’ and you proclaim yourself Christian or Hindu, that is not religion.
Then it is simply a waste of time—because you do not understand God;
you have no love for God, and you are labeling yourself under some sect,
but there is no real religion. That is going on all over the world.
Interviewer: How can we cure the situation?

Srila Prabhupada: Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If you
do not accept that Krsna is the supreme entity, then try to understand.
That is education: there is someone supreme; Krsna is not Indian; He is
God. The sun rises first in India, but that does not mean that the sun is
Indian; similarly, although Krsna appeared in India, now He has come to
the Western countries, through this Krsna consciousness movement.
The Supreme Welfare Work

Srila Prabhupada exchanges letters with the Secretary of the Andhra Pradesh
Relief Fund Committee of Hyderabad, India: “...if you want to perform
relief work simply by collecting funds, I think that will not be successful. You
have to please the supreme authority, and that is the way to success. For example, due to the performance of sankirtana [congregational chanting of
Hare Krsna] here, the rain has begun to fall after a drought of two years... .””

Revered Swamiji,

The residents of the twin cities are happy to have this opportunity to
meet you and your esteemed followers. You may be aware that due to inadequate rainfall during the last two years and its complete failure this
year, more than half of our state [Andhra Pradesh, a state in southern India] is in the grip of a serious drought. With a view to supplement
governmental efforts to combat this evil, a Central Voluntary Organization of citizens drawn from various walks of life has been set up. The
members of this organization surveyed the areas affected by drought.
The situation is pathetic. There are villages where drinking water is not
available for miles. Due to scarcity of fodder, the cattle owners are parting with their cattle for a nominal price. Many of the stray cattle are dying
away due to unavailability of fodder and water. The food problem is also
very serious. Due to high prices of food grains on the open market,
purchase of grains at market prices is beyond the reach of poor villagers,
with the result that at least five to six million people are hardly having
one meal a day. There are many who are on the verge of starvation. The
entire situation is most pathetic and heartrending.

We therefore appeal to your revered self to consider how your Society
could best come to the rescue of these millions of souls who are in
unimaginable distress. The Committee would like to suggest that members of your Society appeal to the bhaktas [devotees] attending your discourses to contribute their mite to the Andhra Pradesh Relief Fund.

The Committee is prepared to send some of its representatives along

182
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 183

with members of your Society wherever you wish to distribute prasada to
the hungry millions in the state.

As manava-seva is madhava-seva {‘‘Service to man is service to God’’],
the Committee is confident that even a little effort by your gracious
Society will go a long way in mitigating the sufferings of hundreds and
thousands of people.

Yours ever in the service of the Lord,
T.L. Katidia, Secretary

Andhra- Pradesh Relief Fund Committee
Hyderabad, India

My dear Mr. Katidia,

Please accept my greetings. With reference to your letter and your personal interview, I beg to inform you that without pleasing the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, no one can become happy. Unfortunately
people do not know who God is and how to make Him happy. Our Krsna
consciousness movement is therefore meant to present the Supreme
Personality of Godhead directly to the people. As stated in the SrimaaBhagavatam, Seventh Canto, Sixth Chapter: tuste ca tatra kim alabhyam
ananta adye/ kim tair guna-vyatikarad iha ye sva-siddhah. |

The idea stated in this verse is that by pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we please everyone, and there is no question of
scarcity. Because people do not know this secret of success, they are making their own independent plans to be happy. However, it is not possible
to achieve happiness in this way. On your letterhead I find many important men in this country who are interested in relieving the sufferings of
the people, but they should know for certain that without pleasing the
Supreme Personality of Godhead all their attempts will be futile. A diseased man cannot live simply on the strength of the help of an expert
physician and medicine. If this were so, then no rich man would ever die.
One must be favored by Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Therefore if you want to perform relief work simply by collecting
funds, I think that it will not be successful. You have to please the
supreme authority, and that is the way to success. For example, due to
the performance of sankirtana here, the rain has begun to fall after a
drought of two years. The last time we performed a Hare Krsna Festival
in Delhi, there was imminent danger of Pakistan’s declaring war, and
when a newspaper man approached me for my opinion, I said there must
184 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

be fighting because the other party was aggressive. However, because of
our sankirtana movement, India emerged victorious. Similarly, when
we held a festival in Calcutta, the Naxalite [Communist] movement
stopped. These are facts. Through the sankirtana movement we can not
only get all facilities for living, but also at the end can go back home, back
to Godhead. Those who are of a demonic nature cannot understand this,
but it is a fact.

I therefore request you, as leading members of society, to join this
movement. There is no loss on anyone’s part for chanting the Hare
Krsna mantra, but the gain is great. According to Bhagavad-gita [3.21],
what is accepted by leading men is also accepted by common men:

yad yad acarati Sresthas
tat tad evetaro janah

sa yat pramanam kurute
lokas tad anuvartate

*“Whatever action a great man performs, common men follow in his
footsteps. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the
world pursues.”’ ,

The sankirtana movement of Krsna consciousness is very important.
Therefore, through you I wish to appeal to all the leading men of India to
accept this movement very seriously and give us all facility to spread this
movement throughout the world. Then there will be a very happy condition, not only in India but all over the world.

Hoping this will meet you in good health,
Your ever well-wisher,
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Declaring Our Dependence on God

In a conversation with the Back to Godhead staff, Srila Prabhupdda discusses the American Revolution: “The Americans say they trust in God. But
without the science of God, that trust is simply fictitious. First take the science
of God very seriously; then put your trust in Him... .They’re manufacturing
their own way of governing. And that is their defect. They will never be successful... . There will always be revolutions—one after another. There will be
no peace.”’ |

Back to Godhead: Thomas Jefferson put the basic philosophy of the
American Revolution into the Declaration of Independence. The important men of the day who signed this document agreed that there are certain very obvious or self-evident truths, the first of which is that all men
are created equal. By this they meant that all men are equal before the law
and have an equal opportunity to be protected by the law.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, in that sense men are, as you say, created equal.

BTG: Another point in the Declaration of Independence is that all men
are endowed by God with certain natural rights that cannot be taken away
from them. These are the rights of life, liberty, and...

Srila Prabhupada: But animals also have the right to life. Why don’t
animals also have the right to live? The rabbits, for instance, are living in
their own way in the forest. Why does the government allow hunters to
go and shoot them?

BTG: They were simply talking about human beings.

Srila Prabhupada: Then they have no real philosophy. The narrow idea
that my family or my brother is good, and that I can kill all others, is
criminal. Suppose that for my family’s sake I kill your father. ‘Is that
philosophy? Real philosophy is suhrdam sarva-bhitdanam: friendliness to
all living entities. Certainly this applies to human beings, but even if you
unnecessarily kill one animal, I shall immediately protest, ‘‘What nonsense are you doing?”’

BTG: The founders of America said that another natural right is the right
to liberty, or freedom. Freedom in the sense that the government

185
186 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

doesn’t have the right to tell you what kind of job you have to do.
Srila Prabhupada: If the government is not perfect, it should not be
allowed to tell people what to do. But if the government is perfect, then it
can.
BTG: The third natural right they mentioned was that every human
being has the right to pursue happiness.
Srila Prabhupada: Yes. But your standard of happiness may be different
from my standard. You may like to eat meat; I hate it. How can your standard of happiness be equal to mine?
BTG: So should everyone be free to try to achieve whatever standard of
happiness he wants?
Srila Prabhupada: No, the standard of happiness should be prescribed
according to the qualities of the person. You must divide the whole
society into four groups: those with brahmana qualities, those with
ksatriya qualities, those with vaisya qualities, and those with sudra
qualities.* Everyone should have good facility to work according to his
natural qualities. ,
You cannot engage a bull in the business of a horse, nor can you
engage a horse in the business of a bull. Today practically everyone is getting a college education. But what is taught at these colleges? Mostly
technical knowledge, which is suédra education. Real higher education
means learning Vedic wisdom. This is meant for the brahmanas. Alone,
sudra education leads to a chaotic condition. Everyone should be tested
to find out which education he is suited for. Some st#dras may be given
technical education, but most sudras should work on the farms. Because
everyone is coming to the cities to get an education, thinking, ‘‘We can
get more money,’’ the agriculture is being neglected. Now there is scarcity because no one is engaged in producing nice foodstuffs. All these
anomalies have been caused by bad government. It is the duty of the
government to see that everyone is engaged according to his natural
qualities. Then people will be happy.
BTG: So if the government artificially puts all men into one class, then
there can’t be happiness.
Srila Prabhupada: No, that is unnatural and will cause chaos.
BTG: America’s founding fathers didn’t like classes because they’d had
such bad experience with them. Before the revolution, Americans had

 

* Brahmanas are the learned and pious teachers (and spiritual leaders) of society, ksatriyas
are the military and administrators, vaisyas are the farmers and merchants, and Sstdras are
the laborers.
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 187

been ruled by monarchs, but the monarchs would always become tyrannical and unjust.

Srila Prabhupada: Because they weren’t trained to be saintly monarchs.
In Vedic civilization, boys were trained from the very beginning of life as
first-class brahmacaris {celibate students]. They went to the gurukula, the
school of the spiritual master, and learned self-control, cleanliness,
truthfulness, and many other saintly qualities. The best of them were
later fit to rule the country.

The American Revolution has no special significance. The point is that
when people become unhappy, they revolt. That was done in America,
that was done in France, and that was done in Russia.

BTG: The American revolutionaries said that if a government fails to
rule the people properly, then the people have the right to dissolve that
government.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Just as in Nixon’s case: they pulled him down.
But if they replace Nixon with another Nixon, then what is the value?
They must know how to replace Nixon with a saintly leader. Because people do not have that training and that culture, they will go on electing one
Nixon after another and never become happy. People can be happy. The
formula for happiness is there in the Bhagavad-gita. The first thing they
must know is that the land belongs to God. Why do Americans claim that
the land belongs to them? When the first settlers went to America, they
said, ‘‘This land belongs to God; therefore we have a right to live here.”’
So why are they now not allowing others to settle on the land? What is
their philosophy? There are so many overpopulated countries. The
American government should let those people go to America and should
give them facility to cultivate the land and produce grains. Why are they
not doing that? They have taken others’ property by force, and by force
they are checking others from going there. What is the philosophy
behind this?

BTG: There is no philosophy.

Srila Prabhupada: Roguism is their philosophy. They take the property
by force, and then they make a law that no one can take another’s property by force. So they are thieves. They cannot restrict God’s property
from being occupied by God’s sons. America and the other countries in
the United Nations should agree that wherever there is enough land, it
may be utilized by the human society for producing food. The government can say, ‘‘All right, you are overpopulated. Your people can come
here. We will give them land, and they can produce food.’ We would
see a wonderful result. But-will they do that? No. Then what is their

 
188 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

philosophy? Roguism. ‘‘I will take the land by force, and then I won’t
allow others to come here.”’

BTG: One American motto is ‘‘One nation under God.”’

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that is Krsna consciousness. There should be
one nation under God, and one world government under God as well.
Everything belongs to God, and we are all His sons. That philosophy is
wanted.

BTG: But in America people are very much afraid of a central government because they think that whenever there’s a strong government
there will always be tyranny.

Srila Prabhupada: If the leaders are properly trained, there cannot be
tyranny.

BTG: But one of the premises of the American system of government is
that if a leader has too much power, he will inevitably become corrupt.
Srila Prabhupada: You have to train him in — a way that he cannot
become corrupt!

BTG: What is that training process?

Srila Prabhupada: That training is the varndsrama-dharma.* Divide the
society according to quality, and train people in the principle that everything belongs to God and should be used in the service of God. Then
there really can be ‘‘one nation under God.”’

BTG: But if society is divided into different groups, won’t there be envy?
Srila Prabhupada: No, no. Just as in my body there are different parts
that work together, so the society can have different parts working for the
same goal. My hand is different from my leg. But when I tell the hand,
‘‘Bring a glass of water,’’ the leg will help. The leg is required, and the
hand is required.

BTG: But in the Western world ¥ we have a working class and a capitalist
class, and there is always warfare going on between the two.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. The capitalist class is required, and the working
Class is also required.

BTG: But they are fighting.

Srila Prabhupada: Because they are not trained up; they have no common cause. The hand and the leg work differently, but the common
cause is to maintain the body. So if you find out the common cause for
both the capitalists and the workers, then there will be no fighting. But if
you do not know the common cause, then there will always be fighting.

* The system of dividing society into four social and four spiritual orders according to people’s natural qualities.

 
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 189

BTG: Revolution?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

BTG: Then the most important thing is to find the common cause that
people can unite on?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, just like in our Krsna conscious society you
come to consult me about every activity because I can give you the common cause. Otherwise, there will be fighting. The government should be
very expert to know the aim of life—the common cause—and they
should train the people to work for the common cause. Then they will be
happy and peaceful. But if people simply elect rascals like Nixon, they
will never find a common cause. Any rascal can secure votes by some arrangement, and then he becomes the head of the government. The candidates are bribing, they are cheating, they are making propaganda to win
votes. Somehow or other they get votes and capture the prime post. This
system is bad.

BTG: So if we don’t choose our leaders by popular election, how will
society be governed?

Srila Prabhupada: You require brdhmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas, and Stidras.
Just as when you want to construct a building, you require engineers.
You don’t want sweepers. Isn’t that so? What will the sweeper do? No,
there must be engineers. So if you follow the division of varnasrama, only
ksatriyas are allowed to govern. And for the legislative assembly—the
senators—only qualified braéhmanas. Now the butcher is in the legislative
assembly. What does he know about making laws? He is a butcher, but
by winning votes he becomes a senator. At the present moment, by the
principle of vox populi, a butcher goes to the legislature. So everything
depends on training. In our Krsna conscious society, we’re actually doing
that, but in the case of politics, they forget it. There cannot be just one
class. That is foolishness, because we have to engage different classes of
men in different activities. If we do not know the art, then we will fail
because unless there is a division of work, there will be havoc. We have
discussed all the responsibilities of the king in the Srimad-Bhdagavatam.
The different classes in society should cooperate exactly as the different
parts of the body do. Although each part is meant for a different purpose,
they all work for one cause: to maintain the body properly.

BTG: What is the actual duty of the government?

Srila Prabhupada: To understand what God wants, and to see that
society works toward that aim. Then people will be happy. But if the people work in the wrong direction, how can they be happy? The government’s duty is to see that they are working in the right direction. The
190 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

right direction is to know God and to act according to His instructions.
But if the leaders themselves do not believe in the supremacy of God,
and if they do not know what God wants to do, or what He wants us to
do, then how can there be good government? The leaders are misled,
and they are misleading others. That is the chaotic condition in the world
today.

BTG: In the United States there has traditionally been the separation of
church and state.

Srila Prabhupada: I am not talking about the church. Church or no
church—that is not the point. The main thing is that the leaders have to
accept that there is a supreme controller. How can they deny it? Everything in nature is going on under the Supreme Lord’s control. The
leaders cannot control nature, so why don’t they accept a supreme controller? That is the defect in society. In every respect, the leaders are feeling that there must be a supreme controller, and yet they are still denying
Him.

BTG: But suppose the government is atheistic...

Srila Prabhupada: Then there cannot be good government. The Americans say they trust in God. But without the science of God, that trust is
simply fictitious. First take the science of God very seriously, then put
your trust in Him. They do not know what God is, but we do. We actually
trust in God.

They’re manufacturing their own way of governing. And that is their
defect. They will never be successful. They are imperfect, and if they go
on manufacturing their own ways and means, they will remain imperfect.
There will always be revolutions—one after another. There will be no
peace.

BTG: Who determines the regulative principles of religion that people
should follow?

Srila Prabhupada: God. God is perfect. He does that. According to the
Vedic version, God is the leader of all living entities (nityo nityanam
cetanas cetananam). We are different from Him because He is all-perfect
and we are not. We are very small. We have the qualities of God, but in
very small quantity. Therefore we have only a little knowledge—that’s
all. With a little knowledge you can manufacture a 747 airplane, but you
cannot manufacture a mosquito. God has created the mosquito’s body,
which is also an ‘“‘airplane.’’ And that is the difference between God and
us: we have knowledge, but it is not as perfect as God’s. So the leaders of
the government have to consult God; then they will rule perfectly.
BTG: Has God also devised the most perfect government?
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 191

Srila Prabhupada: Oh, yes. The ksatriyas ruled the government in Vedic
times. When there was a war, the king was the first to fight. Just like your
George Washington: he fought when there was a war. But what kind of
president is ruling now? When there is a war, he sits very securely and
telephones orders. He’s not fit to be president. When there is war, the
president should be the first to come forward and lead the battle.
BTG: But if man is small and imperfect, how can he execute God’s perfect orders for a perfect government?

Srila Prabhupada: Although you may be imperfect, because you are
carrying out my order, you’re becoming perfect. You have accepted me
as your leader, and I accept God as my leader. In this way society can be
governed perfectly.

BTG: So good government means first of all to accept the Supreme Being
as the real ruler of the government?

Srila Prabhupada: You cannot directly accept the Supreme Being. You
must accept the servants of the Supreme Being—the brdhmanas or
Vaisnavas [devotees of the Lord] —as your guides. The government men
are ksatriyas—the second class. The ksatriyasshould take advice from the
bradhmanas or Vaisnavas and make laws accordingly. The vaisyas should
carry out the ksatriyas’ orders in practice. And the sédras should work
under these three orders. Then society will be perfect.
 

ee ee ee ae ie S-Series Cyaan STU “EPS EE WEE MUN“ > WHR OH YA ste ape my mes im commen mS So ote eet ee

The Peace Formula

“The earth is the property of God, but we, the living entities, especially the socalled civilized human beings, are claiming God’s property as our own, under
both an individual and collective false conception. If you want peace, you have
to remove this false conception from your mind and from the world....”

The great mistake of modern civilization is to encroach upon others’
property as though it were one’s own and to thereby create an unnecessary disturbance of the laws of nature. These laws are very strong. No living entity can violate them. Only one who is Krsna conscious can easily
overcome the stringency of the laws of nature and thus become happy
and peaceful in the world.

As a State is protected by the department of law and order, so the state
of Universe, of which this earth is only an insignificant fragment, is protected by the laws of nature. This material nature is one of the different
potencies of God, who is the ultimate proprietor of everything that be.
This earth is, therefore, the property of God, but we, the living entities,
especially the so-called civilized human beings, are claiming God’s property as our own, under both an individual and collective false conception.
If you want peace, you have to remove this false conception from your
mind and from the world. This false claim of proprietorship by the
human race on earth is partly or wholly the cause of all disturbances of
peace on earth.

Foolish and so-called civilized men are claiming proprietary rights on
the property of God because they have now become godless. You cannot
be happy and peaceful in a godless society. In the Bhagavad-gita Lord
Krsna says that He is the factual enjoyer of all activities of the living entities, that He is the Supreme Lord of all universes, and that He is the
well-wishing friend of all beings. When the people of the world know this
as the formula for peace, it is then and there that peace will prevail.

Therefore, if you want peace at all, you will have to change your con
192
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 193

sciousness into Krsna consciousness, both individually and collectively,
by the simple process of chanting the holy name of God. This is a standard and recognized process for achieving peace in the world. We
therefore recommend that everyone become Krsna conscious by chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare
Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

This is practical, simple, and sublime. Four hundred and eighty years
ago this formula was introduced in India by Lord Sri Caitanya, and now it
is available in your country. Take to this simple process of chanting as
above mentioned, realize your factual position by reading the Bhagavadgita As It Is, and reestablish your lost relationship with Krsna, God. Peace
and prosperity will be the immediate worldwide result.
Spiritual Communism

During his visit to the Soviet Union, Srila Prabhupdda talks with Professor
Grigoriy Kotovsky, head of the India Department at the U.S.S.R. Academy of
Sciences: “Whether you surrender to monarchy, aristocracy, or dictatorship,
you have to surrender; that is a fact. Without surrender there is no life. It is
not possible. So we are educating people to surrender to the Supreme,
wherefrom you get all protection. ... Any other surrender you have to change
by revolution. But when you come to Krsna, then it is sufficient. You are
satisfied. ”’

Srila Prabhupada: The other day I was reading the paper, Moscow News.
There was a Communist congress, and the President declared, ‘“We are
ready to take others’ experience to improve.’’ So I think the Vedic concept of socialism or communism will much improve the idea of communism. For example, in a socialistic state the idea is that no one should
starve; everyone must have his food. Similarly, in the Vedic concept of
grhastha {householder] life it is recommended that a householder see
that even a lizard or a snake living in his house should not starve. Even
these lower creatures should be given food, and certainly all humans
should. It is recommended that the grhastha, before taking his lunch,
stand on the road and declare, ‘‘If anyone is still hungry, please come!
Food is ready!’’ If there is no response, then the proprietor of the household takes his lunch. Modern society takes the people as the whole or
proprietor of a certain state, but the Vedic conception is isdvasyam idam
sarvam—everything is owned by isa, the supreme controller. Jena tyaktena bhuijithah—you may enjoy what is allotted to you by Him. Ma
grdhah kasya svid dhanam: but do not encroach upon others’ property.
This is the /Sopanisad— Veda. The same idea is explained in the different
Purdnas. There are many good concepts in the Vedic literature about
communism. So I thought that these ideas should be distributed to your
most thoughtful men. Therefore I was anxious to speak.

Prof. Kotovsky: It is interesting that here in our country there is now
great interest in the history of old, old thought. From this point of view,
our Institute translated into Russian and published many literary monuments of great Indian culture. You will be interested to discover that we

194
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 195

published some of the Puranas and parts of the Ramayana. There are
volumes in Russian of Mahabharata and also a second edition of
Mahabharata, translated in full. We have also published the full translation of Manu-smrti with Sanskrit commentaries. Interest in these publications was so great that they sold out in a week. They are now completely
out of stock. It was impossible to get them in the book market after a
month. There is great interest among reading people here in Moscow and
the U.S.S.R. toward ancient Vedic culture, and from this point of view we
published many such books.

Srila Prabhupada: Among these Puranas, the Srimad-Bhagavatam is
called the Maha-Purana.

Prof. Kotovsky: Maha-Purana.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. We have translated the full text—first we present the original Sanskrit text, its transliteration, the English equivalent
for each word, then the translation, and then a purport, or explanation of
the verse. In this way, there are eighteen thousand verses in SrimadBhagavatam. We are translating everything literally. You can see. Each
and every verse is being done like that for the whole Bhdgavata Purana.
The opinion of the adcdaryas, the great saintly sages who are the preachers
of the Bhagavata philosophy, is nigama-kalpataror galitam phalam: this is
the ripened fruit of the Vedic desire tree [Srimad-Bhdgavatam 1.1.3]. It is
accepted by all the Indian scholars, and Lord Caitanya especially
preached this Bhagavatam. So we have the complete Bhagavatam in its
English translation. If you want to see it, I can show you.

Prof. Kotovsky: It seems to me that in the Moscow and Leningrad libraries we have nearly all the major texts of ancient Indian culture,
beginning from the Vedas, the original texts in Sanskrit. For instance, in
the Leningrad branch of our Institute there are six or eight editions of
Manu-smrti. This Institute was founded in Imperial Russia in Leningrad,
so in Leningrad we now have a branch of our Institute dealing mainly
with the history of Asiatic culture. You will find here an account of what
is being translated and what studies are being done on the history of Indian religion and also the state of Indian religion, Hinduism, in Hindu
India today.

Srila Prabhupada: Hinduism is a very complex topic.

Prof. Kotovsky: Oh, yes. [They laugh.] Really, to my understanding, it
is not a religion from the European point of view; it is a way of life—
religion, philosophy, a way of life, whatever you want.

Srila Prabhupada: This word ‘‘Hindu’’ is not a Sanskrit word. It was
given by the Muhammadans. You know that there is a river, Indus,
196 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

which in Sanskrit is called Sindhu. The Muhammadans pronounce sas Ah.
Instead of Sindhu, they made it Hindu. So ‘‘Hindu’’ is a term that is not
found in the Sanskrit dictionary, but it has come into use. But the real
cultural institution is called varndsrama. There are four varnas (social
divisions) —brdhmana, ksatriya, vaisya, and Stidra—and four ashrams
(spiritual divisions) —brahmacari, grhastha, vadnaprastha, and sannyasa.
According to the Vedic concept of life, unless people take to this system
Or institution of four varnas and four ashrams, actually they do not become civilized human beings. One has to take this process of four divisions of social orders and four divisions of spiritual orders; that is called
varnasrama. India’s culture is based on this age-old Vedic system.
Prof. Kotovsky: Varndsrama.

Srila Prabhupada: Varndsrama. And in the Bhagavad-gita—perhaps you
have read the Bhagavad-gita?

Prof. Kotovsky: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: There, in the Bhagavad-gita [4.13], is the statement
catur-varnyam maya srstam: this system was created by Visnu [God]. So
since varndsrama is a creation of the Supreme, it cannot be changed. It is
prevalent everywhere. It is like the sun. The sun is a creation of the
Supreme. The sunshine is there in America, in Russia, and in India—
everywhere. Similarly, this varndsrama system is prevalent everywhere
in some form or another. Take, for example, the brdhmanas, the most intelligent class of men. They are the brains of the society. The ksatriyas are
the administrative class; then the vaisyas are the productive class, and the
Sudras are the worker class. These four classes of men are prevalent
everywhere under different names. Because it is created by the original
creator, so it is prevalent everywhere, varnadsrama-dharma.

Prof. Kotovsky: It is interesting that in the opinion of some European
and old Russian scholars, this varndsrama system is a later creation, and
if you would read the old texts of Vedic literature, you would find a much
more simple and agrarian society. It is the opinion of these scholars that
the varndsrama system was introduced in Indian society in the late age of
the Vedic era but not from the beginning. And if you would analyze the
old texts, you would find that in the old classical India it was not so
prevalent.

Srila Prabhupada: As far as we are concerned, it is mentioned in the
Bhagavad-gita. Catur-varnyam maya srstam. The Bhagavad-gita was
spoken five thousand years ago, and in the Bhagavad-gitd it is said, ‘‘This
system of the Bhagavad-gita was spoken by Me to the sun-god.”’ So if you
take an estimation of that period, it comes to forty million years ago. Can
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 197

the European scholars trace back history five thousand years? Can they
go back forty million years? We have evidence that this varnasrama
system has been current at least five thousand years. The varnasrama
system is also mentioned in the Visnu Purdna [3.8.9]. Varndsramdcaravata purusena parah puman. That is stated in the Visnu Purana. Varnasrama-dharma is not a phenomenon of a historical period calculated in
the modern age. It is natural. In the Srimad-Bhdgavatam the comparison
is given that just as in the body there are four divisions—the brain division, the arms division, the belly division, and the leg division—so by
nature’s way these four divisions are existing in the social body. There
exist a class of men who are considered the brain, a class of men who are
considered the arms of the state, a class of men who are called the productive class, and so on. There is no need of tracing history; it is naturally
existing from the day of creation.

Prof. Kotovsky: You have said that in any society there are four divisions, but they are not so easy to distinguish. For instance, one can group
together different social classes and professional groups into four divisions in any society; there is no difficulty. The only difficulty is, for instance, in the socialistic society—in our country and other socialist
societies—how you can distinguish the productive group from the
workers.

Srila Prabhupada: For example, we belong to the intellectual class of
men. This is a division. ,
Prof. Kotovsky: Intelligent class, brahmanas. And you can also put
together all the intelligentsia in that department.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Prof. Kotovsky: And then the administrative class.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Prof. Kotovsky: But who are the vaisyas and sudras? That is the difficulty. Because all others are workers—factory workers, collective farm
workers, and so on. So from this point of view there is a great distinction,
in my opinion, between socialist society and all societies preceeding
socialism because in modern Western society you can group all social and
professional classes in these particular class divisions— brahmanas,
ksatriyas, vaisyas, and sudras: intellectuals, productive class, owners of
the productive system (factory owners, for instance), and menial
workers. But here you have no vaisyas because you have administrative
staffs in factories, and you can call them ksatriyas, and then there are the
Sudras, the workers themselves, but no intermediate class.

Srila Prabhupada: That is stated. Kalau stidra-sambhavah. In this age
198 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

practically all men are sédras. But if there are simply sddras, the social
order will be disturbed. In spite of your state of Sddras, the brahmana is
found here, and that is necessary. If you do not divide the social order in
such a way, there will be chaos. That is the scientific estimation of the
Vedas. You may belong to the stdra class, but to maintain social order
you have to train some of the suédras to become bradhmanas. Society cannot depend on stdras. Nor can you depend on the braéhmanas. To fulfill
the necessities of your body, there must be a brain, arms, a stomach, and
legs. The legs, the brain, and the arms are all required for cooperation to
fulfill the mission of the whole body. So in any society you can see that
unless there are these four divisions, there will be chaos. It will not work
properly. It will be maya, and there will be disturbances. The brain must
be there, but at the present moment there is a scarcity of brains. Iam not
talking of your state or my state; I am taking the world as a whole. Formerly the Indian administration was a monarchy. For example, Maharaja
Pariksit was a ksatriya king. Just before his death, he renounced his royal
order. He came to the forest to hear about self-realization. If you want to
maintain the peace and prosperity of the whole world society, you must
create a very intelligent class of men, a class of men expert in administration, a class of men expert in production, and a class of men to work.
That is required; you cannot avoid it. That is the Vedic conception,
mukha-bahuru-pada-jah (Srimad-Bhagavatam 11.17.13]. Mukha means
‘‘the face,’’ ba@hu means ‘“‘the arms,’’ udru means ‘‘the waist,’’ and pada,
‘‘the legs.’’ Whether you take this state or that state, unless there is a
smooth, systematic establishment of these four orders of life, the state or
society will not run very smoothly.

Prof. Kotovsky: Generally it seems to me that this whole varndsrama
system to some extent created a natural division of labor in the ancient
society. But now division of labor among people in any society is much
more complicated and sophisticated. So it is very confusing to group
them into four classes.

Srila Prabhupada: Confusion has come to exist because in India, at a
later day, the son of a brdhmana, without having the brahminical
qualifications, claimed to be a brahmana; and others, out of superstition
or a traditional way, accepted him as a braéhmana. Therefore the Indian
social order was disrupted. But in our Krsna consciousness movement we
are training brahmanaseverywhere because the world needs the brain of
a brahmana. Although Maharaja Pariksit was a monarch, he had a body of
brahmanas and learned sages to consult, an advisory body. It is not that
the monarchs were independent. In history it is found that if some of the
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 199

monarchs were not in order, they were dethroned by the brahminical advisory council. Although the brahmanas did not take part in politics, they
would advise the monarch how to execute the royal function. This is not
too far in the past. How long ago was Asoka?

Prof. Kotovsky: That would be equal to what we call, in our terminology, ancient and medieval India.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Prof. Kotovsky: In old and feudal India—you are right—it was very
open, and the major part of the high administrative staff in the legislative
department were bradhmanas. Even in the Mogul era there were brahmanas to advise the Muslim emperors and administrators.

Srila Prabhupada: That is a fact—the bradhmanas were accepted. They
formed the advisory committee of the king. For example, Candragupta,
the Hindu king, was in the age of Alexander the Great. Just before
Candragupta, Alexander the Great went from Greece into India and conquered a portion. When Candragupta became emperor, he had Canakya
as his prime minister. Perhaps you have heard this name Canakya?
Prof. Kotovsky: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, he was a great brdhmana-politician, and it is by
his name that the quarter of New Delhi where all the foreign embassies
are grouped together is called Canakya Purl. Canakya Pandita was a great
politician and brahmana. He was vastly learned. His moral instructions
are still valuable. In India, schoolchildren are taught Canakya Pandita’s
instructions. Although he was the prime minister, Canakya Pandita
maintained his brdhmana spirit; he did not accept any salary. If a
brahmana accepts a salary, it is understood that he has become a dog.
That is stated in the Srimad-Bhdgavatam. He can advise, but he cannot
accept employment. So Canakya Pandita was living in a cottage, but he
was actually the prime minister. This brahminical culture and the
brahminical brain is the standard of Vedic civilization. The Manu-smrti is
an example of the standard of brahminical culture. You cannot trace out
from history when the Manu-smrti was written, but it is considered so
perfect that it is the Hindu law. There is no need for the legislature to
pass a new law daily to adjust social order. The law given by Manu is so
perfect that it can be applicable for all time. It is stated in Sanskrit to be
tri-kaladau, which means ‘‘good for the past, present, and future.”’
Prof. Kotovsky: I am sorry to interrupt you, but to my knowledge all of
Indian society in the second half of the eighteenth century was, by order
of the British administration, under a law divergent from Hindu law.
There was a lot of change. The actual Hindu law that was used by the
200 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Hindus was quite different from the original Manu-smrti.

Srila Prabhupada: They have now made changes. Even our late Pandita
Jawaharlal Nehru introduced his own Hindu code. He introduced the
right of divorce in marriage, but this was not in the Manu-samhitda. There
are SO many things they have changed, but before this modern age the
whole human society was governed by the Manu-smrti. Strictly speaking,
modern Hindus are not strictly following the Hindu scriptures.

But our point is not to try to bring back the old type of Hindu society.
That is impossible. Our idea is to take the best ideas from the original
idea. For example, in the Srimad-Bhdgavatam there is a description of the
communist idea. It is described to Maharaja Yudhisthira. If there is something good, a good experience, why shouldn’t you adopt it? That is our
point of view. Besides that, modern civilization is missing one allimportant point—the aim of human life. Scientifically, the aim of human
life is self-realization, dtma-tattva. It is said that unless the members of
human society come to the point of self-realization, they are defeated in
whatever they do. Actually it is happening in modern society, despite all
economic advancement and other advancement: instead of keeping
peace and tranquillity, they are fighting—individually, socially, politically, and nationally. If we think about it in a cool-headed way, we
can see that in spite of much improvement in many branches of knowledge, we are keeping the same mentality that is visible in the lower
animal society. Our conclusion, according to the Srimad-Bhdgavatam, is
that this human body is not meant for working hard for sense gratification. But people do not Know anything beyond that. They do not know
about the next life. There is no scientific department of knowledge to
study what happens after this body is finished. That is a great department
of knowledge.

In the Bhagavaa-gitd |2.13] it is said, dehino ’smin yathaé dehe. Deha
means ‘‘this body.’’ Dehinah means ‘‘the one who owns this body.”’
Dehino ’smin yatha dehe kaumaram yauvanam jara. The dehi, the owner of
the body, is within, and the body is changing from one form to another.
The child has a certain type of body that changes to another type when he
is older. But the owner of the body still exists throughout. Similarly,
when this body is completely changed, we accept another body. People
do not understand this. We are accepting different bodies, even in this
life, from babyhood to childhood to boyhood to youth. That is a fact—
everyone knows it. I was a child, but that childhood body is no more. I
have a different body now. What is the difficulty in understanding that
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 201

when this body will be no more, then I will have to accept another body?
It is a great science.

Prof. Kotovsky: As you know, there are two quite opposite approaches
to this problem. The approach is slightly different according to different
religions, but at the same time, any religion recognizes and searches for
the change-of-place experience, or transmigration of spirit. In Christian
religion, in Judaism, in...

Srila Prabhupada: I am not talking religions with you. I am talking
science and philosophy. One religion may accept one way; that is not our
concern. We are concerned with the point that if the owner of the body is
permanent in spite of different changes of body, there should be no difficulty in understanding that when this body changes entirely, the owner
of the body will have another body.

Prof. Kotovsky: Another approach is that there is no separation. There
are no two phenomena—the body and the owner of the body are the
same.

Srila Prabhupada [emphatically]: No.

Prof. Kotovsky: When the body dies, the owner also dies.

Srila Prabhupada: No, no. But why is there no department of knowledge
in the university to study this fact scientifically? That is my proposition—
they are lacking. It may be as you say or it may be as I say, but there must
be a department of knowledge to study this. Recently a cardiologist in
Toronto, a doctor, has accepted that there is a soul. I had some correspondence with him, and he strongly believes that there is a soul. So
there is another point of view, but our process is to accept knowledge
from authority. We have Krsna’s statement on this subject, and He is authoritative. Krsna is accepted as the authority by all the dcaryas. The
Bhagavad-gita is accepted by scholarly and philosophical circles all over
the world. Krsna says:

dehino ’smin yatha dehe
kaumaram yauvanam jara

tatha dehantara-praptir
dhiras tatra na muhyati

**Just as the soul gives up the childhood body and comes to the boyhood
body and then to youth, the soul also gives up this body and accepts
another body.’ [Bg. 2.13] This statement is given by Krsna, the greatest
authority according to our tradition of knowledge. We accept such a
202 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

statement without argument. That is the way of Vedic understanding.
Prof. Kotovsky: The difficulty is that our approach is that we do not
believe in anything without argument. We can believe only things based
on argument.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that is allowed. That is stated in the Bhagavaagita [4.34]. Tad viddhi pranipatena pariprasnena sevaya. Pariprasna, argument, is allowed—but not in the challenging spirit, but rather with the
Spirit to understand. Argument is not denied. But as far as Vedic statements are concerned, they are infallible, and the scholars of the Vedas accept them in that way. For example, cow dung is the stool of an animal.
Now, the Vedic statement is that as soon as you touch the stool of any
animal—even if you touch your own stool—you are impure and have to
purify yourself by taking a bath. According to the Hindu system, after
evacuating one has to take a bath.

Prof. Kotovsky: That is quite understandable hygienic knowledge.
Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Prof. Kotovsky: Yes, that is right.

Srila Prabhupada: But in another place it is stated that cow dung, although the stool of an animal, is pure. Even if you apply it to an impure
place, that place becomes purified. This is superficially contradictory. In
one place it is said that the stool of an animal is impure and as soon as you
touch it you have to be purified, and in another place it says that cow
dung is pure. According to our knowledge, it is contradictory —but still it
is accepted by those who are followers of the Vedas. And the fact is that if
you analyze cow dung, you will find that it contains all antiseptic
properties.

Prof. Kotovsky: This I don’t know.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, one professor in a medical college analyzed it,
and he found it full of antiseptic properties. So Vedic statements, even if
found contradictory, if analyzed scrutinizingly will prove correct. There
may be an exception. But it is accepted, and when scientifically analyzed
and examined, it is found to be correct.

Prof. Kotovsky: Yes, if you analyze from the scientific point of view, that
is right.

Srila Prabhupada: There are other instances—for example, the conchshell. The conchshell is the bone of an animal, and according to Vedic instruction if you touch the bone of an animal you become impure and
have to take a bath. But this conchshell is kept in the Deity room because
it is accepted as pure by the Vedas. My point is that we accept Vedic laws
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 203

without argument. That is the principle followed by scholars. If you can
substantiate your statements by quotations from the Vedas, then they are
accepted. You are not required to substantiate them in other ways. There
are different kinds of pramdnas, or evidences. Proof by Vedic quotation is
called sruti-pramana. As in the legal court if you can give statements from
the law book your statement is accepted, so all statements you give, if
supported by Ssruti-pramanas, are accepted by scholars. I think you know
the Vedas are known as Srutis.
Prof. Kotovsky: Yes.
Srila Prabhupada: sruti-smrti-puranadi
pancaratra-vidhim vina

aikantiki harer bhaktir
utpatayaiva kalpate
[Brahma-ydmala]

Any system we accept must be supported by evidences of sruti, smrti, the
Purdnas, and Pajficaratra. That which is not proved by these pramanas is a
disturbance.

Prof. Kotovsky: Could I just say one thing? What is in the Vedas could
also have been proved in a scientific way. Today, suppose there is a scientific laboratory. What is said by that lab is true. That it is true you accept,
without going into the propriety of it. Suppose you have a scientific
workshop or institution; if this workshop or scientific institution says,
‘*‘This is not good,’’ the general body will take it for granted: ‘‘Yes. The
scientific body has said so, so it is understood.”’

Srila Prabhupada: Similarly, Vedic authoritative statements are accepted by the dcaryas [great teachers]. India is governed by the dcdryas—
Ramanujacarya, Madhvacarya, Sankaracarya. They accept the Vedas, and
their followers accept them. The benefit is that I do not waste my time to
research whether cow dung is pure or impure; rather, because it is stated
in the Vedas to be pure, I accept it. I save my time by accepting the srutipramana. In that way there are different statements in the Vedas for
sociology and politics or anything, for veda means ‘‘knowledge.”’

sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto
mattah smrtir jaanam apohanam ca
vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
vedanta-krd veda-vid eva caham
[Bg. 15.15]
204 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Prof. Kotovsky: May I put one question to you? Have you many
branches of your society in the world?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Prof. Kotovsky: Where is your main center, and where are the branches
of the Krsna consciousness society?

Srila Prabhupada: Of course, I have over sixty-five branches.

Prof. Kotovsky: Sixty-five branches.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, and I have made my main center in Los
Angeles. And now we are establishing an important center in Mayapur,
the birthplace of Lord Caitanya. Have you been to India?

Prof. Kotovsky: Six or seven times. Now there is a very difficult situation in Calcutta because of the influx of refugees from Bangladesh.
Srila Prabhupada: Yes, but we had our savikirtana there for ten days, and
it was very wonderful. The gathering was not less than thirty thousand
people daily. They were much interested in hearing our lectures, since we
lecture from the Srimad-Bhdgavatam and the Bhagavaa-gita. So people
are responding from every part of the world, especially the American
boys and girls. They are especially interested, and England, and also Germany and France. From here I plan to go to Paris. What is the name of
that place?

Disciple: In Paris? Oh, Fontenay-aux-Roses?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, they have taken a whole house, a nice house. So
our process is very simple. We ask our students to observe four prohibitive principles—no illicit sex life, no eating of meat, fish, or eggs, no
gambling, and no intoxication, including cigarettes, tea, and coffee. One
has to obey these four principles and chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra,
and you will find how, by this process only, these boys and girls are
quickly improving. The process is very simple. Besides that, we have
books—volumes of books—the Srimad-Bhdgavatam, the Bhagavaa-gitd.
Throughout all these years, I have written about one dozen fourhundred-page books— Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead in two
parts, the Srimad-Bhdgavatam in six parts, Teachings of Lord Caitanya in
one part, The Nectar of Devotion in one part. So we are trying to spread
this Krsna consciousness. Krsna is a historical personality, as much as
Lenin is a historical personality. Just as you are trying to understand his
philosophy, we are trying to understand Krsna’s philosophy.

Prof. Kotovsky: Are there many participants in your sixty-five
branches?

Srila Prabhupada: Oh, yes, more than one thousand initiated, and outside there are many. The one thousand have accepted the principles. Just
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 205

like these boys. [Srila Prabhupada points to his two secretaries. ]

Prof. Kotovsky: But does that mean that these students abstain from
normal Western, European universities? For instance, can a normal student from one of the various universities who is attending lectures in the
normal way also be initiated and admitted to your community?

Srila Prabhupada: If you want to live in our community and be initiated,
we welcome you. If not, come try to understand our philosophy, read our
books—there are so many books, magazines, questions, and answers.
Try to understand the philosophy. It is not that all of a sudden a student
comes and becomes our disciple. He first of all comes, associates, and
tries to understand. We do not canvass. He voluntarily says that he wants
to be a disciple.

Prof. Kotovsky: What happens if, for instance, one is not a student but a
young worker or the young son of a farmer? Would he renounce his
whole life and join your community in a given center? How would he
maintain himself in his day-to-day life, in material life?

Srila Prabhupada: As I told you, this propaganda is meant for creating
bradhmanas all over the world because the brdhmana element is lacking.
One who seriously comes to us has to become a brahmana, so he should
adopt the occupation of a brdhmana and give up the occupation of a
ksatriya or Sudra. But if one wants to keep his profession and also at the
same time understand our movement, that is allowed. We have many
professors following our movement. There is Howard Wheeler, a
professor at Ohio State University. He is my disciple. He is continuing
with his professorship, but almost all the money he is getting he is spending for this Krsna consciousness. Grhasthas, those who are in householder life outside, are expected to contribute fifty percent of their
income for our society, keep twenty-five percent for family, and keep
twenty-five percent for personal emergencies. But Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu teaches that it does not matter whether one is a grhastha
(householder), or in the renounced order, or a brdhmana, or a Stidra.
Lord Caitanya says, ‘“‘Anyone who understands the science of Krsna becomes My spiritual master.’’ The actual words in Bengali are kibd vipra,
kibd nyasi, Sidra kene naya. Do you understand a little Bengali?

Prof. Kotovsky: A little.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, as a vibration. Yei krsna-tattva-vetta, sei ‘guru’
haya. ‘“‘Anyone who understands the science of Krsna can become a
Spiritual master.’’ [Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya8.128]

Prof. Kotovsky: But by creating brdhmanas from different social classes
of society, you deny the old prescription of the Hindu scriptures.
206 , THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Srila Prabhupada: No, I establish it.

Prof. Kotovsky: According to all scriptures—the Puranas, etc.—every
member of one of these four classes of varnas has to be born within it.
Srila Prabhupada: No, no, no, no.

Prof. Kotovsky: That is the foundation of all the varnas...

Srila Prabhupada: No, no. I am sorry.

Prof. Kotovsky: The foundation of all the varnas...

Srila Prabhupada: You have spoken incorrectly. With great respect I beg
to submit that you are not speaking correctly. In the Bhagavad-gita [4.13]
it is stated, cdtur-varnyam maya srstam guna-karma-vibhdgasah. ‘“These
four orders of bradhmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas, and stidras were created by
Me according to quality and work.’’ There is no mention of birth.
Prof. Kotovsky: I agree with you that this is the addition of later
brahmanas who tried to perpetuate these qualities.

Srila Prabhupada: That has killed the Indian culture. Otherwise there
would have been no necessity of the division of part of India into
Pakistan. Not only that, but from the historical point of view this whole
planet was Bharata-varsa, and it was controlled by one flag up to the time
of Maharaja Pariksit. Then it gradually separated. This is history. Lately
they have separated Pakistan. So Bharata-varsa is now crippled into a
small piece of land. Otherwise, according to Vedic scripture, this whole
planet is called Bharata-varsa. Formerly it was named Ilavrta-varsa. But
since Emperor Bharata ruled this planet, it 1s called Bharata-varsa. So this
culture, Krsna consciousness, was always existent. Consider any
religion—Christian, Muhammadan, Jewish. They are at most two to
three thousand years old. But you cannot trace out the beginning of this
Vedic scripture. It is therefore called sandtana, eternal. This culture is for
this whole human society. It is not a religious faith. Religious faith you
can change, but real dharma you cannot change. Try to understand
Krsna. In the Bhagavad-gita [18.66] He says, sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam Ssaranam vraja: ‘“Give up all other forms of religion and just
surrender to Me.’’ That is real knowledge—to surrender to the Supreme.
You or I—anyone—is surrendered to someone. That is a fact. Our life is
by surrender, is it not? Do you disagree with this point?

Prof. Kotovsky: To some extent you surrender.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, to the full extent.

Prof. Kotovsky: You have to surrender to the society, for instance. To
the whole people.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, to the whole people, or to the state or to the king
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 207

or the government or whatever you say. This surrender must be there.
Prof. Kotovsky: The only difficulty is that we cannot half surrender to a
government or a king. The principal difference is of surrender to a king,
to a person, or to the society.

Srila Prabhupada: No, that is only a change of color. But the principle of
Surrender is there. Whether you surrender to monarchy, democracy,
aristocracy, or dictatorship, you have to surrender; that is a fact. Without
surrender there is no life. It is not possible. So we are educating people to
surrender to the Supreme, wherefrom you get all protection, just as
Krsna says (sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam Ssaranam vraja). No one
can say, ‘‘No, I am not surrendered to anyone.’’ Not a single person. The
difference is where he surrenders. The ultimate surrendering object is
Krsna. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gita [7.19] Krsna says, bahtinam janmanam ante jnanavan mam prapadyate: *’ After surrendering to so many
things birth after birth, when one is factually wise he surrenders unto
Me.”’ Vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma sudurlabhah: ‘‘Such a mahdatma is
very rare.’

Prof. Kotovsky: But at the same time it seems to me that surrender is to
be accompanied by revolt. The history of mankind has proved that
mankind has developed only by revolt against some kind of surrender. In
the medieval age there was the French Revolution. It was revolt against
surrender. But this revolution itself was surrender to the rank and file of
the people. You are agreed?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Prof. Kotovsky: So it is not enough to come to a full stop. Surrender is to
be accompanied with revolt against some and surrender to other people.
Srila Prabhupada: But the surrender will be fully stopped when it is surrender to Krsna.

Prof. Kotovsky: Ah, ah.

Srila Prabhupada: That is full stop—no more surrender. Any other surrender you have to change by revolution. But when you come to Krsna,
then it is sufficient. You are satisfied. I'll give you an example: a child is
crying, and people move him from one lap to another. Oh, he does not
stop. But as soon as the baby comes to the lap of his mother...

Prof. Kotovsky: It stops.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, full satisfaction. So this surrender, these
changes, will go on in different categories. But the sum total of all this
surrender is surrender to maya. Therefore, in the Bhagavad-gita it is said
that this surrender, neglecting Krsna, is all maya. Either you surrender to
208 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

this or to that, but final surrender is surrender to Krsna; then you will be
happy. The process of surrender is there, but surrender to Krsna keeps
One quite satisfied, transcendentally.

Prof. Kotovsky: Haven’t you come across hostile attitudes to your teachings from orthodox Hindus or brdhmanas in India?

Srila Prabhupada: We have subdued them.

Prof. Kotovsky: Ah.

Srila Prabhupada: Any orthodox Hindu may come and challenge, but
we have our weapons—the Vedic literatures. So no one has come. Even
Christian priests in America love me. They say, °““These boys are
American, Christian, Jewish, and now they are so much after God. But
we could not deliver them.’’ They are admitting it. Their fathers and
their parents come to me, offer their obeisances, and say, ‘‘Swamiji, it is
our great fortune that you have come here to teach God consciousness.”’
So on the contrary, I have been well received. In India also, since you inquired of India, all other sects are admitting that before me many kinds of
swamis went to the Western countries, but they could not convert even a
single person to Krsna consciousness. They are admitting that. As far as I
am concerned, I don’t take any credit, but I am confident that because I
am presenting the Vedic knowledge as it is, without adulteration, it is
being effective. That is my confidence. If you have the right medicine and
you administer it to a patient, you must be sure that he will be cured.
Prof. Kotovsky: How many out of your one thousand disciples do you
have in India itself? How many of your community do you have in India?
Srila Prabhupada: In India?

Prof. Kotovsky: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: In India there are many Krsna conscious persons—
hundreds, thousands, millions. In India there is no question. There is not
a single Hindu who is not Krsna conscious.

Prof. Kotovsky: Yes, I understand.

Srila Prabhupada: Vaisnavas. This is called the Vaisnava cult. You have
been in India, so as it is commonly known, there are many millions of
Vaisnavas. For example, this gentleman [an Indian gentleman present] is
the commander of Air India airlines. He is not my disciple, but he is a
Vaisnava, Krsna conscious. Similarly, in India there are millions of Krsna
conscious persons. There are even Muhammadans who are Krsna conscious. At Gorakhpur University there is a Muhammadan professor who
is a great devotee of Lord Krsna. So this is natural. It is said in the
Caitanya-caritamrta that Krsna consciousness is everywhere, in everyone’s heart. It simply has to be awakened by this process. That is all. It is
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 209

there in your heart also. It is not that it is foreign to you. In everyone’s
heart there is Krsna consciousness. By this process we have to awaken it.
It is just like the way the sun rises. It is not that all of a sudden the sun
comes from nowhere. It is there, but it rises in the morning. Similarly,
this Krsna consciousness is everywhere, but some way or another it is
now covered. By this process it is reawakened and aroused by association.
Prof. Kotovsky: You came yesterday | to Moscow. Have you seen something here in Moscow?

Srila Prabhupada: No, I am not very much interested in sight-seeing.
Prof. Kotovsky: But in any case, just to stay in an old-style hotel is not
interesting—not many people to see. And you are leaving the day after
tomorrow?

Srila Prabhupada: That is my program.

Prof. Kotovsky: You are leaving for the United States or for Europe?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes, for Europe. Paris. And we have two very big
ceremonies in London and San Francisco. They are making arrangements for the Ratha-yatra Car Festival. This car festival is observed in
Jagannatha Purl. You have been to Jagannatha Puri?

Prof. Kotovsky: Yes, the car festival has been held from immemorial
times. A very old tradition. Huge cars.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, and it has now been introduced in the Western
countries in London and San Francisco, and gradually maybe we will introduce it in other countries also.

Prof. Kotovsky: In London there is a large Indian community.

Srila Prabhupada: No, no. This is organized by the Englishmen and
Americans. The Indian communities in London and San Francisco are
trying to become—you know the word? Sahib?

Prof. Kotovsky: [Laughs.] Westernized. [They both laugh.] A very great
social anthropologist at the University has written something very interesting. He says there are two processes—the process of westernization among brahmanas, mainly the upper class, and the process called
Sanskritization, which is the process of adopting brdhmana rituals, etc.,
by so-called lower classes, even untouchables. It is a very interesting process in India just now. But India’s position, unfortunately, is problematic.
Srila Prabhupada: The difficulty is that India is nowhere. They are trying
to imitate Western life, but from a materialistic or technical point of
view, they are one hundred years back.

Prof. Kotovsky: Yes, that is right. But what to do for India?

Srila Prabhupada: There is one thing I am experiencing. If India’s
spiritual asset is distributed, that will increase India’s honor. Because
210 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

everywhere I go, people still adore Indian culture. If this treasure-house
of India’s spiritual knowledge is properly distributed, at least people outside of India will understand that they are getting something from India.
Prof. Kotovsky: Of course, you’re right. The Indian cultural heritage is
to be made Known everywhere. But at the same time, in what way would
this benefit the Indian masses themselves? They are sitting in India, and
they have nothing to gain from the spreading of the Indian cultural
heritage all over the world. Indian villages have to have fertilizers,
tractors, etc.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, we do not object to that.

Prof. Kotovsky: Yes, I don’t think you can object, but at the same time,
something has to be done in India. One may call it westernization, but
this introduction to an industrial-technological revolution is needed in all
fields of Indian life—agriculture, industry, etc.

Srila Prabhupada: Arjuna, before understanding the Bhagavad-gita, was
a fighter, and after understanding the Bhagavad-gita he remained a
fighter. So we don’t want to change the position. For example, you are a
respectable professor, a teacher. We don’t say that you must change your
position. We have come to convince you about our philosophy. That is
all. Arjuna was refusing to fight. ‘‘Krsna, I don’t want to kill my relatives.
I do not want this kingdom.’’ But he was taught the Bhagavad-gita, and at
the end when Krsna inquired, ‘“What is your decision now?’’ he said,
karisye vacanam tava—‘‘Yes, I shall act as You say.’’ [Bg. 18.72] That
means that his consciousness changed. He was a fighter, and he remained
a fighter, but he changed his consciousness. We want that. We don’t want
to disturb the present condition of society. We are not against technology. No, but we try to make one understand this Krsna consciousness. That is our program.

Prof. Kotovsky: Of course, at the same time the final goal of any consciousness is to change the society—to make it a better society.

Srila Prabhupada: That is automatic.

Prof. Kotovsky: I am not really so happy that the ultimate goal is not.to
disturb society, because in modern society there are many things to be
changed through consciousness.

Srila Prabhupada: That preliminary change is to follow rules and regulations of austerity. For example, don’t take intoxicants.

Prof. Kotovsky: No indulging in intoxicants—simplicity, etc.

Srila Prabhupada: So if one takes to this process...

Prof. Kotovsky: Then the others will come automatically.

Srila Prabhupada: One’s whole life will change, because these four
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 211

things—illicit sex life, intoxicants, meat eating, and gambling—are very
great impediments to social improvement.

Prof. Kotovsky: That will automatically make life simpler because a person who does not indulge in illicit sex, intoxicants, and such other things
has to lead a comparatively simple life.

Srila Prabhupada: The other day I was speaking in Bombay with a respectable gentleman. I was telling him that Krsna says:

mam hi partha vyapdsritya
ye ‘pi syuh papa-yonayah

striyo vaisyas tatha stdras
te ‘pi yanti param gatim

‘“*Even those who are lowborn [pdpa-yonayah| — stri, vaiSyas, and stidras—
are also included by accepting Me. By accepting My shelter they
are also elevated to the transcendental position.’’ [Bg. 9.32] Now why
have the higher classes of Hindu society neglected this injunction of the
Bhagavad-gita? Suppose one is papa-yonayah, lowborn. Krsna says that
he can be ‘‘elevated to the transcendental position if he accepts Me.”’
Why wasn’t this message propagated by the higher class of people so that
the so-called lowborn could be elevated? Why did they reject them? The
result was that instead of accepting the Muhammadans, the Indians rejected them, and now they are partitioned off. They have become eternal
enemies of India. So for the first time we are trying to elevate persons to
the higher position of Krsna consciousness, even if one is lowborn. Because the soul is pure. In the Vedas it is said that the soul is untouched by
any material contamination; it is simply temporarily covered. This covering should be removed. Then one becomes pure. That is the mission of
human life—to uncover ourselves from this material environment, come
to spiritual understanding, and surrender to Krsna. Then life is perfect.
The Tiny World of Modern Science

During a morning walk in April of 1973, at Venice Beach, Los Angeles, Srila
Prabhupdda discusses modern science and its high priests: “They claim to
have millions of dollars worth of knowledge, but if you ask them a question,
they simply give you a postdated check. Why should we accept it? They cannot
even produce a spear of grass through their biological or chemical experiments. Nonetheless, they are claiming that the creation is produced by some
chemical or biological method. Why does no one question all this nonsense ?”’

Srila Prabhupada: The whole world of science and technology is running on the false idea that life is born from matter. We cannot allow this
nonsensical theory to go unchallenged. Life does not come from matter.
Matter is generated from life. This is not theory; it is fact. Science is
based on an incorrect theory; therefore all its calculations and conclusions are wrong, and people are suffering because of this. When all these
mistaken modern scientific theories are corrected, people will become
happy. So we must challenge the scientists and defeat them. Otherwise
they will mislead the entire society.

Matter changes in six phases: birth, growth, maintenance, production
of by-products, dwindling, and death. But the life within matter, the
spirit soul, is eternal; it goes through no such changes. Life appears to be
developing and decaying, but actually it is simply passing through each of
these six phases until the material body can no longer be maintained.
Then the old body dies, and the soul enters a new body. When our
clothing is old and worn, we change it. Similarly, one day our bodies become old and useless, and we pass on to a new body.

As Krsna says in the Bhagavad-gita {2.13], dehino ’smin yatha dehe
kaumaram yauvanam jara/ tatha dehdntara-praptih: ‘‘As the embodied
soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age,
the soul similarly passes into another body at death.’’ And a little later
[2.18]: antavanta ime dehda nityasyoktah Saririnah. This means that only
the material body of the indestructible and eternal entity is subject to
destruction. This material body is perishable, but the life within the body
is nitya, eternal.

212
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 213

According to the Vedas, the measurement of the soul within the body
is one ten-thousandth part of the tip of a hair. This is very small; in fact, it
is atomic. Yet because of that atomic spiritual energy, my body is working. Is it so difficult to understand? Suppose a man thinks himself very
stout and strong. Why is he stout and strong? Only because within his
body is a small spiritual spark. But as soon as the spiritual spark is gone,
his body dies, and his strength and vigor become void. If scientists say
that matter is the cause and origin of life, then let them bring just one
dead man back to life by injecting him with chemicals. But this they cannot do.

Dr. Singh: Since scientists cannot see the spirit soul, they say its existence is very doubtful.

Srila Prabhupada: How can they see it? It is too small to see. Where is
such seeing power?

Dr. Singh: Still, they want to sense it by some means.

Srila Prabhupada: If you inject just one grain of deadly poison into
someone, he immediately dies. No one can see the poison or how it acts.
But the poison is acting nevertheless. In the same way, the Vedas say that
because the minute particle called the soul is within the body, the whole
body is working nicely. If I pinch myself, I immediately feel it because I
am conscious all over my skin. But as soon as the soul is absent, which is
the case when my body dies, you can take this same skin and cut it and
chop it, and no one will protest. Why is this simple thing so hard to
understand? Is this not detecting spirit?

Dr. Singh: That is the soul. But what about God?

Srila Prabhupada: First of all let us understand the soul. The soul is a
small God. If you understand the sample, then you can understand the
whole.

Now here is matter. [Srila Prabhupada points at a dead tree with his
cane.] Formerly leaves and twigs were growing from this tree. Why are
they not growing now? Can the scientists answer this question?
Karandhara dasa: They would say the chemical composition has changed.
Srila Prabhupada: All right, then if they are so advanced in knowledge
of chemistry, they must supply the proper chemicals to make branches
and leaves grow again.

Brahmananda Swami: Knowledge means that one must be able to demonstrate his theory. They should be able to show in their laboratories that
life is caused by a combination of chemicals.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, the scientific method means first observation,
then hypothesis, and then demonstration. But these scientists cannot
214 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

demonstrate their hypothesis. They simply observe and then speak
nonsense.

Scientists say that the chemicals are the cause of life. But all the chemicals that were there when the tree was living are still present. And life energy is also there. There are thousands of microbes in the tree, and they
are all living entities. No one can claim that life energy is lacking in the
body of this tree.

Dr. Singh: But what about the life energy of the tree itself?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that is the difference. The living force is individual, and the particular individual living entity which was the tree has
left. This must be the case, since all the chemicals that are necessary to
support life are still there yet the tree is dead.

Here is another example: suppose I am living in an apartment, and
then I leave it. I am gone, but many other living entities remain there—
ants, spiders, and so forth. It is not true that simply because I have left
the apartment, it can no longer accommodate life. Other living entities
are still living there. It is simply that I—an individual living being —have
left. The chemicals in the tree are like the apartment; they are simply the
environment for the individual living force—the soul—to act through.
Thus the scientists will never be able to produce life in the chemical
laboratory.

The so-called scientists say that life begins from chemicals. But the real
question is, ‘‘Where have the chemicals come from?’’ The chemicals
come from life, and this means that life has mystic power. For example,
an orange tree contains many oranges, and each orange contains chemicals—citric acid and others. So where have these chemicals come from?
Obviously they have come from the life within the tree. The scientists are
missing the origin of the chemicals. They have started their investigation
from the chemicals, but they cannot identify the origin of the chemicals.
Chemicals come from the supreme life—God. Just as the living body of a
man produces many chemicals, the supreme life (the Supreme Lord) is
producing all the chemicals found in the atmosphere, in the water, in
humans, in animals, and in the earth. And that is called mystic power.
Unless the mystic power of the Supreme Lord is accepted, there is no
solution to the problem of the origin of life.

Dr. Singh: The scientists will reply that they cannot believe in mystic
power.

Srila Prabhupada: But they must explain the origin of the chemicals.
Anyone can see that an ordinary tree is producing many chemicals; they
cannot deny it. But how does it produce them? Since they cannot answer
Finding the Cure for Today's Social Ills 215

this, they must accept that the living force has mystic power. I cannot explain how my fingernail is growing out of my finger; it is beyond the
power of my brain. In other words, it is growing by inconceivable potency, or acintya-sakti. So if acintya-sakti exists in an ordinary being,
imagine how much acintya-sakti God possesses.

The difference between God and me is that although I have the same
potencies as God, I can produce only a small quantity of chemicals,
whereas He can produce enormous quantities. I can produce a little water
in the form of perspiration, but God can produce the seas. Analysis of
one drop of seawater gives you the qualitative analysis of the sea, without
any mistake. Similarly, the ordinary living being is part and parcel of
God, so by analyzing the living beings we can begin to understand God.
In God there is great mystic potency. God’s mystic potency is working
swiftly, exactly like an electric machine. Machines operate by certain energy, and they are so nicely made that all the work is done simply by
pushing a button. Similarly, God said, ‘‘Let there be creation,’’ and there
was creation. Considered in this way, the workings of nature are not very
difficult to understand. God has such wonderful potencies that the creation, on His order alone, immediately takes place.

Brahmananda Swami: Scientists don’t accept God or acintya-sakti.
Srila Prabhupada: That is their rascaldom. God exists, and His acintyasokti also exists.

Karandhara dasa: Scientists say that life was created biochemically.
Srila Prabhupada: And I say to them: ‘‘Why don’t you create life? Your
biology and chemistry are very advanced, so why don’t you create life?’’
Karandhara dasa: They say they will create life in the future.

Srila Prabhupada: When in the future? If the scientists know the creative process, why can’t they create life now? If life has a biochemical
origin, and if biologists and chemists are so advanced, then why can’t
they create life in their laboratories? When this crucial point is raised,
they say, ‘“‘We shall do it in the future.’’ Why in the future? That is nonsense. Trust no future, however pleasant. What is the meaning of their
advancement? They are talking nonsense.

Karandhara dasa: They say that they are right on the verge of creating
life.

Srila Prabhupada: But that is also the future in a different way. They
must accept that they still do not know the truth about the origin of life.
Since they are expecting to be able to create life in the future, presently
their knowledge must be imperfect. Their proposal is something like giving someone a postdated check. Suppose I owe you ten thousand dollars

 

216 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

and I say, ‘‘Yes, I will pay you the entire sum with this postdated check. Is
that all right?’’ If you are intelligent, you will reply, ‘‘At present, give me
at least five dollars in cash so I can see something tangible.’’ Similarly,
the scientists cannot produce even a single blade of grass by biochemistry, yet still they claim that life is produced from matter. What is this
nonsense? Is no one questioning this? We can prove that life began from
life. Here is the proof: when a father begets a child, the father is living,
and the child is living. But where is the scientist’s proof that life comes
from matter? We can prove that life begins from life, and we can also
prove that the original life is Krsna. But what evidence exists that a child
is ever born out of a dead stone? The scientists cannot prove that life
comes from matter. They are leaving that aside for the future.
Karandhara dasa: The basis of what the scientists call “‘scientific integrity’’ is that they talk only about what they can experience through
their senses. ,

Srila Prabhupada: Then they are suffering from what we call ‘‘Doctor
Frog’s philosophy.”’ There was once a frog who had lived all his life in a
well. One day a friend visited him and informed him of the existence of
the Atlantic Ocean.

‘‘Oh, what is this Atlantic Ocean?’’ asked the frog in the well.

‘*It is a vast body of water,’’ his friend replied.

“How vast? Is it double the size of this well?”’

*‘Oh, no, much larger,’ his friend replied.

‘“How much larger? Ten times the size?”’

In this way the frog went on calculating. But what was the possibility of
his ever understanding the depths and far reaches of the great ocean?
Our faculties, experience, and powers of speculation are always limited.
The frog was always thinking in terms relative to his well. He had no
power to think otherwise. Similarly, the scientists are estimating the Absolute Truth, the cause of all causes, with their imperfect senses and
minds, and thus they are bound to be bewildered. The essential fault of
the so-called scientists is that they have adopted the inductive process to
arrive at their conclusions. For example, if a scientist wants to determine
whether or not man is mortal by the inductive process, he must study
every man to try to discover if some or one of them may be immortal.
The scientist says, ““I cannot accept the proposition that all men are mortal. There may be some men who are immortal. I have not yet seen every
man. Therefore how can I accept that man is mortal?’’ This is called the
inductive process. And the deductive process means that your father,
your teacher, or your guru says that man is mortal, and you accept it.
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 217

Dr. Singh: So there is an ascending process of gaining knowledge and a
descending process?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. The ascending process will never be successful
because it relies on information gathered through the senses, and the
senses are imperfect. So we accept the descending process.

God cannot be known by the inductive process. Therefore He is called
adhoksaja, which means “‘unknowable by direct perception.’’ The scientists say there is no God because they are trying to understand by direct
perception. But He is adhoksaja; therefore the scientists are ignorant of
God because they are missing the method of knowing Him. In order to
understand transcendental science, one must approach a bona fide spiritual master, hear from him submissively, and render service to him.
Lord Krsna explains this in the Bhagavad-gita [4.34]: tad viddhi pranipatena pariprasnena sevaya.

Dr. Singh: There is a scientific journal called Nature. It contains articles
concerning natural products like plants and animals, but it does not mention God—only nature.

Srila Prabhupada: We may correctly observe that plants are being produced by nature, but we must ask, ‘‘What has produced nature?’’ To ask
this question is intelligence.

Dr. Singh: The scientists don’t think about that.

Srila Prabhupada: So they are fools. As soon as we speak of nature, the
next question should be, ‘‘ Whose nature?’’ For instance, I speak of my
nature, and you speak of your nature. Therefore, as soon as nature is
mentioned, the next inquiry should be, ‘‘ Whose nature?”’

Nature means energy, and as soon as you speak of energy, you must
accept that there is a source of that energy. For example, the source of
electric energy is the electric powerhouse. Electricity is not produced
automatically. We must install a powerhouse and a generator. Similarly,
in the Vedas it is said that material nature is working under Krsna’ S
direction.

Dr. Singh: So do you mean to say that science has started from an intermediate point—not from the original point?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that is it exactly. They are ignorant of the origin.
The scientists start from one point—but where does that point come
from? That they do not know, in spite of vast research. One has to accept
- that the original source is God, who is full of all mystic powers and from
whom everything emanates. He Himself says in the Bhagavad-gita [10.8]:
aham sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam pravartate, ‘“‘1 am the source of
all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from Me.”’’ Our
218 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

conclusions are not based on blind faith; they are most scientific. Matter
comes from life. In life—in the origin—there are unlimited material
resources; that is the great mystery of creation.

Modern scientific research is just like Sankhya philosophy, which
analyzes material elements. Sankhya means ‘‘to count.’’ We are also
Sankhya philosophers to some extent because we count and analyze the
material elements; this is land, this is water, this is air, this is sunshine,
this is fire. Furthermore, I can count my mind, my intelligence, and my
ego. Beyond my ego, however, I cannot count. But Krsna says that there
is existence beyond the ego, and that existence is the living force—the
spirit soul. This is what the scientists do not know. They think that life is
merely a combination of material elements, but Krsna denies this in the
Bhagavad-gita [5.12]. Apareyam itas tv anyam prakrtim viddhi me param:
*‘Besides this inferior nature there is a superior energy of Mine.’’ The inferior energy is the material elements, and the superior energy is the living entity.

bhimir apo ‘nalo vayuh
kham mano buddhir eva ca
ahankara itiyam me
bhinna prakrtir astadha

‘‘Karth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence, and false ego—all
together these eight comprise My separated material energies.”’ [Bg. 7.4]
Krsna explains here in the Bhagavad-gitd that vayu (gas) comes from
Him, and that finer than the gases is kham (ether). Finer than ether is the
mind, finer than the mind is intelligence, and finer than the intelligence
is the soul. But the scientists do not know this. They can perceive only
gross things. They mention va@yu, but where does the vayu come from?
Where does the gas come from?

Dr. Singh: That they cannot answer.

Srila Prabhupada: But we can answer. We have the knowledge that gas
comes from kham, or ether, and ether comes from mind, mind comes
from intelligence, and intelligence comes from Krsna’s superior energy,
the spirit soul.

Dr. Singh: Are both inferior and superior energies studied in Sankhya
philosophy?

Srila Prabhupada: No. Sankhya philosophers do not know of superior
energy. They simply analyze the material elements, just as the scientists
do. Neither the scientists nor the Sankhya philosophers know anything of
Finding the Cure for Today's Social Ills 219

the spirit soul. They are simply analyzing Krsna’s material energy.

Dr. Singh: They are analyzing the creative material elements?

Srila Prabhupada: Material elements are not creative! The soul is creative. No one can create life with only matter, and matter cannot create
itself. You, a living entity, can mix hydrogen and oxygen to create water.
But matter itself has no creative energy. If you place a bottle of hydrogen
near a bottle of oxygen, will they automatically combine without your
help? , :

Dr. Singh: No. They must be mixed.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, the superior energy—the living entity—is required. Oxygen and hydrogen are inferior energy, but when the superior
energy mixes them, then they can become water.

Inferior energy has no power unless superior energy is involved. This
sea [indicating the Pacific Ocean] is calm and quiet. But when superior
force—air—pushes it, high waves are created. The sea has no power
without the superior force. Similarly, there is another force superior to
the air, and another, and another, until we arrive at Krsna, the most
superior force. This is real research. Suppose a railroad train is just starting to move. The engine pushes one car, which pushes another, and so
on, until the entire train is moving. And the whole motion originates
with the engineer, a living entity. Similarly, in the cosmic creation, Krsna
gives the first push, and then, by means of many successive pushes, the
entire cosmic manifestation comes into being. This is explained in the
Bhagavad-gita [9.10]: mayddhyaksena prakrtih stiyate sa-caracaram. ‘‘This
material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunti, and is
producing all moving and unmoving beings.’’ And a little later:

sarva-yonisu kaunteya
murtayah sambhavanti yah

tasam brahma mahad yonir
aham bija-pradah pita

‘All species of life are made possible by birth in material nature, and I
am the seed-giving father.’’ [Bg. 14.4] For example, if we sow a banyan
seed, a huge tree eventually grows up and produces millions of new
seeds. Each of these seeds, in turn, produces another tree with millions
of new seeds, and so on. So Krsna is the original seed-giving father. —
Unfortunately, the scientists only observe the immediate cause; they
do not perceive the remote cause. There are two causes—the immediate cause and the remote cause. Krsna is described in the Vedas as
220 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

sarva-karana-karanam, the cause of all causes. If you understand the
cause of all causes, then you understand everything. Yasmin vijfdte sarvam evam vijnatam bhavati: “‘If you know the original cause, the later,
subordinate causes are automatically known.’’ Although the scientists
are searching after the original cause, when the Vedas, which contain perfect knowledge, give the original cause, they won’t accept. They keep to
their partial, imperfect knowledge.

Dr. Singh: Scientists are worried about energy sources, and now they are
working to utilize solar energy for cooking, lighting, and various other
purposes. They are hoping that when they exhaust all other energy
sources, they will be able to use solar energy.

Srila Prabhupada: This is not a very new theory. Everyone knows that
because the roots of trees store the sun’s energy, it is possible to get fire
from a tree. These scientists are tiny creatures, but they are very proud.
We don’t give them credit, because they are simply stating what everyone knows. As soon as you cut a tree, you cannot get fire from it. It has to
be dried in the sun. When the energy is gathered from the sun, the tree
can be utilized for fire. Actually everything is being maintained by the
sun’s energy, but the scientists don’t know where the sun’s energy
comes from. In the Bhagavad-gita [15.12] Krsna says:

yad aditya-gatam tejo
jagad bhasayate ‘khilam

yac candramasi yac caégnau
tat tejo viddhi mamakam

‘The splendor of the sun, which dissipates the darkness of this whole
world, comes from Me. And the splendor of the moon and the splendor
of fire are also from Me.”’

Again, Krsna says, jyotisam ravir amsuman: ‘‘Of lights I am the radiant
sun.”’ [Bg. 10.21] Also, in the Eleventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita Ar- —
juna tells Krsna, sasi-stirya-netram: ‘“The sun and moon are among Your
great, unlimited eyes.’’ This knowledge is contained in the Bhagavaagita, but scientists cannot attain this knowledge by their speculation. Can
they?

Dr. Singh: It is not possible.

Srila Prabhupada: And what is their knowledge? The scriptures say that
even if you counted all the grains of sand on earth, you still would not be
able to understand God. All this material counting does not mean that
you have the capacity to understand the unlimited. But it is even beyond
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 221

their capacity to count all the material things. Why are the scientists so
proud of their energy and capacities? They do not even know of the material things, and what to speak of the spiritual. As far as scientists and
other living entities are concerned, their knowledge is limited. But this is
not so for Krsna. If we receive knowledge from Krsna, that knowledge is
perfect. In the scriptures we receive information that there are nine
hundred thousand species of life existing within the ocean. The information given in the scriptures is exact because it comes from Krsna, and as
Krsna Himself says: ‘‘As the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I know
everything that has happened in the past, all that is happening in the
present, and all things that are yet to come.’’ [Bg. 7.26] .
Dr. Singh: We have to take knowledge from the supreme knower.
Srila Prabhupada: For perfect knowledge we have to approach a
superior person, a guru. One may try to learn a subject by reading books
at home, but he can learn much better by going to college and approaching a professor. In the same way, we have to approach a guru. Of course,
if we encounter a false guru, our knowledge is false. But if our guru is
perfect, our knowledge is perfect. We accept Krsna as our guru. If He is
perfect in knowledge, our knowledge is also perfect. As far as we’re concerned, we do not have to be perfect in ourselves, but if we receive
knowledge from the perfect, our knowledge is perfect. We cannot say
that we understand that there are nine hundred thousand species of life
in the ocean because we have studied the entire ocean. Rather, we say
that we take this information from scriptures and therefore it is perfect.
This is the Vedic process.

Scientists may carry out much research work, but however great a
scientist may be, his senses are imperfect. Therefore he cannot have perfect knowledge. What is the value of our eyes? We cannot see without
sunlight, nor can we see small things without a microscope. Our eyes are
imperfect, and the instruments our eyes have discovered are also imperfect. How, then, is it possible to get perfect knowledge? Because the living entity is limited, his knowledge is limited. A child may know that two
plus two equals four, but when he speaks of higher mathematics, we do
not take him seriously. The senses through which a scientist acquires
knowledge are limited and imperfect; therefore his knowledge is limited
and imperfect. In his ignorance he may claim to know everything, but
that is simply nonsense.

A blind man may lead another blind man, but what does it avail them
when they both fall into a ditch? The laws of nature bind us hand and
foot, yet we think we are free to speculate. This is illusion. Although
222 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

conditioned by so many of nature’s laws, the rascals think they are free.
Yet if there is a cloud, they cannot see the sun. What power have we to
see? Only when nature’s laws give us some facility are we able to see. Indeed, we can only experiment under certain conditions, and if the conditions are not favorable, our experiments fail. Why then are we so proud
of experimental knowledge?

Why experiment? Things are already there. The sun’s energy is there,
given by God for us to use. What else is there to know? So many apples
fall from trees. What further need is there to explain the law of gravity?
Actually the scientists are lacking in common sense. They are simply
concerned with ‘“‘scientific’’ explanations. They say the law of gravity
works only under certain conditions, but who has made these conditions? When Krsna appeared as Lord Raéamacandra, He threw stones on
the water, and the stones floated. The law of gravity did not work in that
case. Therefore the law of gravity works only under the direction of the
Supreme Lord. The law in itself is not final. A king may give a law, but he
can change that law immediately. The ultimate law-giver is Krsna, and a
law will only work by His will. Scientists try to explain God’s will in so
many ways, but because they are conditioned by maya, illusion, they can
only talk like a person haunted by ghosts. Tell me, what is the scientific
explanation that accounts for all the varieties of trees?

Karandhara dasa: They say that nature mutates and makes these
varieties.

Srila Prabhupada: Then it must be nature’s will. And what is that will?
Does the land have any will?

Karandhara dasa: Well, they are very vague on that point.

Srila Prabhupada: That means that they do not have perfect knowledge.
They do not know that behind nature is the will of Krsna.

Dr. Singh: They explain that the chemical composition of these different
plants is different.

Srila Prabhupada: That’s all right, but who made these chemical compositions? As soon as you say “‘chemical composition,’’ you immediately
require a God.

Karandhara dasa: They say there is no need for a God because if you
mix two chemicals together...

Srila Prabhupada: God or not, there must be some will. There must be
some consciousness. Two chemicals mix and produce such and such.
Who mixes them? Consciousness is there. Well, that consciousness is
Krsna. There is consciousness everywhere, and as soon as you accept
that consciousness, you must accept consciousness as a person.
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 223

Therefore, we speak of Krsna consciousness. In the Bhagavad-gitd it is
Stated that consciousness is all-pervading. You may have consciousness,
and I may have consciousness, but there is another consciousness, which
is all-pervading. My consciousness is limited to my body, and your consciousness 1s limited to yours, but there is another consciousness, that is
within you, me, and everyone. That is Krsna consciousness.

Actually everything in the world is relative. That is a scientific fact. Our
bodies, lives, intelligence, and everything else are all relative. To us an
ant may seem to have a very short life, but for the ant his life is about a
hundred years in duration. That hundred yearseis relative to the body.
Similarly, Brahma, who lives fantastically long from our point of view,
only lives a hundred years from his point of view. This is relativity.
Karandhara dasa: Then the relativity is based upon our individual
Situation.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Therefore it is said that what is food for one is
poison for another. People are thinking that because they cannot survive
on the moon, no other living entities can. Everyone thinks of things in a
relative way, in his own terms. This is the meaning of ‘frog philosophy.”’
The frog is always thinking of things in relation to his well. He has no
power to conceive of the Atlantic Ocean because his well is his only experience. God is great, but we are thinking of God’s greatness in our own
terms, in terms of relative greatness. Some insects are born at night; they
grow at night, have their children at night, and die at night. They never
see the sun; therefore they conclude that there is no such thing as day. If
you asked the insect about the morning, he would say, ““There cannot be
any morning.’’ Similarly, when people hear of Brahma’s long duration of
life from the scriptures, they do not believe it. They say, ‘‘How can anyone live for such a long time?’’ In the Bhagavad-gita [8.17] Krsna states:

sahasra-yuga-paryantam
ahar yad brahmano viduh
ratrim yuga-sahasrantam
te ‘ho-ratra-vido janah

‘*By human calculation, a thousand ages taken together is the duration of
Brahma’s one day. And such also is the duration of his night.”’

Thus Brahma, by these calculations, lives for so many millions and
trillions of years. We cannot believe this, although evidence is given in
the scriptures. In other words, we conclude that Krsna talks nonsensically while we speak as authorities. Even great scholars say that these
224 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Scriptural statements are all mental speculations. Although these men
are nothing but rascals, they pass for reputable scholars. They place
themselves above God’s position by attempting to refute or deny the
Statements of God in the revealed scriptures. In this way so many fools in
the guise of scholars, scientists, and philosophers are misguiding the
whole world.
Dr. Singh: Of course, so much is being written about Darwin’s theory.
In any library there are hundreds of books on his theories.
Srila Prabhupada: Do they accept or reject them?
Dr. Singh: Generally they accept him, but there are some who are very
critical.
Srila Prabhupada: Darwin speaks about the evolution of the species of
life, but he has no real information about spiritual evolution. He knows
nothing about the progress of the spirit soul from lower forms of life to
higher forms. He claims that man has evolved from monkeys, but we can
see that the monkey is not extinct. If the monkey is the immediate
forefather of man, why is the monkey still existing?
Dr. Singh: Darwin says that the species are not created independently
but are descended from one another.
Srila Prabhupada: If there is no question of independence, how can he
abruptly begin with a certain species? He must explain how the original
Species came into existence.
Karandhara dasa: Scientists claim that the earth was created by biological chemistry, and they refuse to teach that God created the earth because they think everyone will consider them fools.
Srila Prabhupada: If their biology and chemistry are so advanced, why
don’t they create something? They claim they may be able to create life
in the future, but why in the future? Life is already created. Is science
based on the future? We should trust no future, however pleasant we
may think it will be. Everyone is thinking the future will be very pleasant,
but what assurance do we have of this? They have to accept that they do
not know what the truth actually is. They cannot even produce a spear of
grass through their biological or chemical experiments. Nonetheless they
are claiming that the creation is produced by some chemical or biological
method. Why does no one question all this nonsense?
Dr. Singh: In the ultimate analysis, when they consider the origin of life,
they say that everything started from matter. In other words, living matter comes from nonliving matter.
Srila Prabhupada: From where is this living matter coming now? Did it
come from nonliving matter in the past and not at the present? How is

“a sition wine nega tem ra naan a ps

ee a eset opi i ca nr

rae Gas ea Sa a

ee rns Son a

"RIP Eo A ND Rn fof MENDON hone SE

eee eae Cress Spain nothin ier aaa envet

ie sh Wena ti ies ins

eesen sack te is sh cannes
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 225

the ant coming? Is it materializing from dirt? Even an ant does not come
from inert matter. What proof do they have of such a theory? Darwin
claims that in the distant past no really intelligent man existed, that man
simply evolved from the apes. If there was no intelligent brain in the past,
how is it that these Vedic scriptures were written thousands and thousands of years ago? How do they explain a sage like Vyasadeva?

Dr. Singh: They have no explanation. They simply say these are
unknown forest sages.

Srila Prabhupada: Vyasadeva may be unknown to them, but nonetheless he was there. How is it he got such a brain? He may be unknown to
you or to me, but nonetheless his brainwork is there, his philosophy is there, his language, linguistics, poetic arrangements, and verbal
Strength. You may not know the person, but you can understand the
brain.

Dr. Singh: Weren’t all the varieties of animals existing from the
beginning?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Simultaneous creation is verified by the
Bhagavaa-gita. All the varieties of animals and men as well as demigods
were existing from the beginning. A living entity wants a certain type of
body, and Krsna gives it to him. Because he desires things in a certain
way, he associates with certain qualities of nature in matter. According to
his association, he receives a particular type of body. The psychological
forces, the mind, thinking, feeling, and willing determine the particular
type of situation and body the living entity receives. The evolutionary
process is there, but it is not an evolution of species. It is not that one
species of life develops from another, for, as Krsna states:

avyaktad vyaktayah sarvah
prabhavanty ahar-agame

ratry-agame praliyante
tatraivavyakta-samjnake

*“When Brahma’s day is manifest, this multitude of living entities comes
into being, and at the arrival of Brahma’s night they are all annihilated.”’
[Bg. 8.18]

The evolution is the spiritual evolution of the individual living entity
through the various species of life. If one enters into the body of a fish, he
has to undergo the evolutionary process step by step. If one is on the top
of the stairs and somehow falls down, he again has to go up the evolutionary staircase step by step. Of course the scientists are busy making so
226 | THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

much research that they cannot understand this. If you tell them they are
going to be trees in their next life, they think you are speaking nonsense.
After all, what can we learn by research? When the cause of all causes is
known, then everything knowable becomes known, and nothing remains
unknown. As the Vedas state: yasmin vijfiidte sarvam evam vijnhdtam
bhavati. lf we know the Absolute Truth, all other truths become known,
but if we don’t know the Absolute Truth, we are in ignorance. One may
not be an official scientist or philosopher, but he may challenge anyone
and talk boldly if he only knows one thing—Krsna.

This contemporary civilization is so proud of its independence, but actually it is so much dependent on oil. If the oil supply is stopped, then
what will these rascal scientists do? They cannot do anything. Let them ©
try to manufacture oil in their test tubes, enough oil to run their civilization on. At present there is a scarcity of water in India. What can the
scientists do about this? They may know the chemical composition of
water, but they cannot produce it when there is a great scarcity. They require the help of clouds, and all that is God’s manipulation. Actually they
cannot do anything. They have gone to the moon, but for all their labor
they have simply taken away some dust and rocks. The rascal government exacts taxes and spends money unnecessarily. This is their intelligence. It is a state of asses, that’s all. The politicians have no sympathy or
compassion. They do not consider that the hard-earned money is coming
from the public and that they are spending it by shooting big rockets off
to other planets. All they do is promise to bring back more dust. First
they may get a handful of dust, then they promise to bring back tons of
dust. What is the meaning of all this?

Karandhara dasa: They believe that there may be life on Mars.

Srila Prabhupada: They may believe or not believe—what is the gain?
What we do know is that life is here. They know this, yet they are
engaged in fighting and in killing life. Here is life. Here is a human being.
Life is here undoubtedly. But they are busy trying to destroy it with their
big bombs. This is their scientific advancement.

Dr. Singh: They are very curious to know what is going on, on other
planets.

Srila Prabhupada: That means that for their childish curiosity they are
spending so much money. They can spend so much to satisfy their curiosity, but when so many poverty-stricken countries ask them for
help, they say there is no money. They are very proud to go to the moon,
but why don’t they take information how to go to Krsna’s Goloka
Vrndavana? If they go there, all their curiosity will be satisfied. They will
Finding the Cure for Today’s Social Ills 227

learn that beyond this inferior energy there is indeed a superior, spiritual
energy. This material energy cannot work independently. The spiritual
energy has to join it. Material elements are not created of themselves. It
is the soul that is creative. We may try to make something with matter,
_ but matter does not create itself. Hydrogen and oxygen will come in contact only when moved by the superior energy. Only fools can expect the
entire cosmic manifestation, which is only matter, to come into being
automatically. We may have a nice car, but if there is no driver, what is
its use? Unless a man knows how to work a machine, unless a man
pushes a button, the machine does not work. Similarly, without the
superior energy, the material energy cannot act. Behind this wonderful
cosmic manifestation is the direction of a superior energy. All this information is given in the scriptures, but still people will not believe it.

Actually everything is God’s property, but people are claiming this
property to be theirs or their country’s. Now they are talking about the
problem of overpopulation, but the fact is that God has supplied enough.
Actually there is enough land and enough food if it is properly used.
People are artificially creating problems, and the scientists are helping
them by giving them so many destructive devices. They simply encourage the rascals and rogues who are trying to use up God’s property. If
you help a murderer or a thief, you also become a criminal. Is that not
so? There is so much trouble in the world because the scientists are helping all the thieves and rogues. Thus they are all criminals. Stena eva sah.
One who does not recognize the proprietorship of the Supreme Lord is a
thief.

Our mission is to bring these rascals to their senses. Now one must find
out the means to do this. The rascals are suffering, but because they are
sons of God they should not suffer. They do not know that there is God
or that there is happiness. They know nothing of bliss or of eternal life.
They are carrying on so much research and living for fifty, sixty, or seventy years. After that they do not know what is going to happen. They
have no knowledge that life is eternal. Actually their position is like that
of an animal. An animal does not know what is after death, nor does he
actually contemplate death. He does not know why he is here, nor does
he know the value of life. Under the influence of maya, the animal simply
goes on eating, sleeping, defending, mating, and dying. That’s all. People
are endeavoring so hard, but for what purpose? They say that they are
struggling so hard to make provisions for the next generation, but what
are the provisions for? They cannot reply to that. This Krsna consciousness movement is meant to give real purpose to life by establishing
 

228 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Krsna, God, as the center of everything. It is therefore to the scientist’s
benefit to understand this important movement.

 
VII.

Returning

to the

Eternal Religion
Srila Prabhupada Arrives in America

On September 18, 1965, as the Indian steamship Jaladuta nears Boston's
Commonwealth Pier, Srila Prabhupdda prays to Lord Krsna in a moving
poem. “... Iam simply praying for Your mercy so that I will be able to convince them about Your message....”

l

My dear Lord Krsna, You are so kind upon this useless soul, but I do not
know why You have brought me here. Now You can do whatever You
like with me.

2

But I guess You have some business here, otherwise why would You
bring me to this terrible place?

3 .

Most of the population here is covered by the material modes of ignorance and passion. Absorbed in material life, they think themselves
very happy and satisfied, and therefore they have no taste for the transcendental message of Vasudeva. I do not know how they will be able to
understand it.

4

But I know Your causeless mercy can make everything possible because
You are the most expert mystic.

230
Returning to the Eternal Religion 231

5

How will they understand the mellows of devotional service? O Lord, I
am simply praying for Your mercy so that I will be able to convince them
about Your message.

6

All living entities have become under the control of the illusory energy
by Your will, and therefore, if You like, by Your will they can also be
released from the clutches of illusion.

7

I wish that You may deliver them. Therefore if You so desire their
deliverance, then only will they be able to understand Your message.

8

The words of the Srimad-Bhdgavatam are Your incarnation, and if a sober
person repeatedly receives them with submissive aural reception, then
he will be able to understand Your message.

9

It is said in the Srimad-Bhagavatam [1.2.17-21]: ‘‘Sri Krsna, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Paramatma [Supersoul] in everyone’s
‘heart and the benefactor of the truthful devotee, cleanses desire for material enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who relishes His
messages, which are in themselves virtuous when properly heard and
chanted. By regularly hearing the Bhdgavatam and rendering service unto
the pure devotee, all that is troublesome to the heart is practically
destroyed, and loving service unto the glorious Lord, who is praised with
transcendental songs, is established as an irrevocable fact. At the time
loving service is established in the heart, the modes of passion [rajas] and
ignorance [tamas], and lust and desire [kdma] disappear from the heart.
Then the devotee is established in goodness and he becomes happy.
Thus established in the mode of goodness, the man rejuvenated by loving service to the Lord gains liberation from material association [muktil
and comes to know scientifically of the Personality of Godhead. Thus the
232 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

knots of the heart and all misgivings are cut to pieces. The chain of fruitive actions [karma] is terminated when one sees the self as master.”’

10

He will become liberated from the influence of the modes of ignorance
and passion and thus all inauspicious things accumulated in the core of
the heart will disappear.

11

How will I make them understand this message of Krsna consciousness?
I am very unfortunate, unqualified, and the most fallen. Therefore I am
seeking Your benediction so that I can convince them, for I am powerless
to do so on my own.

12

Somehow or other, O Lord, You have brought me here to speak about
You. Now, my Lord, it is up to You to make me a success or failure as
You like. ~

13

O spiritual master of all the worlds! I can simply repeat Your message, so
if You like You can make my power of speaking suitable for their
understanding.

14

Only by Your causeless mercy will my words become pure. I am sure that
when this transcendental message penetrates their hearts they will certainly feel engladdened and thus become liberated from all unhappy conditions of life.

15

O Lord, I am just like a puppet in Your hands. So if You have brought me
here to dance, then make me dance, make me dance. O Lord, make me
dance as You like.

 
Returning to the Eternal Religion 233

16

I have no devotion, nor do I have any knowledge, but I have strong faith
in the holy name of Krsna. I have been designated as Bhaktivedanta, and
now, if You like, You can fulfill the real purport of Bhaktivedanta.

Signed—the most unfortunate, insignificant beggar
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami,

on board the ship Jaladuta, Commonwealth Pier,
Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.A.

dated 18th of September, 1965

 
‘“Build Your Nations
on the Spiritual Platform’’

Srila Prabhupdda gives an address at the University of Nairobi: “You are trying to develop yourselves, so please develop spiritually, for spiritual development is sound development. Don’t imitate the Americans and Europeans, who
are living like cats and dogs. ... The atomic bomb is already there, and as
soon as the next war breaks out, all their skyscrapers and everything else will
be finished. Try to understand this from the real viewpoint of human life, the
spiritual viewpoint. ...”

Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for kindly coming here to
participate in this meeting for spreading Krsna consciousness. The Krsna
consciousness movement is trying to bring human society to the point
where everyone’s life can become successful. The subject today is the
real meaning of human life. We are trying to instruct the entire world
about this meaning.

Human life is attained after many, many millions of years of evolution.
We should remember that there are 8,400,000 species of life according to
the Padma Purana. Life began with the aquatics, for we can understand
from Vedic literature that at the beginning of creation the entire planet
was merged in water. This material world is composed of five gross elements—earth, water, fire, air, and ether. Besides these there are three
subtle elements—mind, intelligence, and ego. Behind these curtains ts
the spirit soul, which is covered by these eight elements. This information is given in the Bhagavad-gita.

Human beings are not the only living entities to have a spirit soul. We
are all spirit souls—beasts, birds, reptiles, insects, trees, plants, aquatics,
and so on. The spirit soul is simply covered by different dresses, just as
some of you are dressed in white clothes, some in green, some in red,
etc. But we are not concerned with the dress; we are concerned with you
as spirit soul. Thus it is said in the Bhagavad-gita [5.18]:

vidya-vinaya-sampanne
brahmane gavi hastini

Suni caiva Svapake ca
panditah sama-darsinah

234

 
Returning to the Eternal Religion 235

‘‘The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a
learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog, and a dogeater.”’

The sage does not make any distinction on the basis of color, intelligence, or species. He sees every living entity as a small particle of spirit
soul. It is stated:

kesdgra-Sata-bhagasya
Satamsah sadrsatmakah

jivah stiksma-svartipo ‘yam
sankhyatito hi cit-kanah

‘*There are innumerable particles of spiritual atoms, which are measured
as one ten-thousandth of the upper portion of a hair.’’ Because we have
no instrument to measure the dimensions of the spirit soul, the small
particle of spirit soul is measured in this way. In other words, the soul is
SO small that it is smaller than an atom. That small particle is within you,
within me, within the elephant, within gigantic animals, in all men, in the
ant, in the tree, everywhere. However, scientific knowledge cannot estimate the dimensions of the soul, nor can a doctor locate the soul within
the body. Consequently material scientists conclude that there is no soul,
but that is not a fact. There is a soul. The presence of the soul makes a
difference between a living body and a dead body. As soon as the soul
departs from the body, the body dies. It has no value. However great a
scientist or a philosopher one may be, he must admit that as soon as the
soul departs from the body, the body dies. It then has no value and has to
be thrown away. We should try to understand this; the soul is valuable,
not the body. The fact that the soul is transmigrating is explained in the
Bhagavaa-gita |2.22]:

vasamsi jirnani yatha vihaya
navani grhnati naro ‘parani

tathd sariradni vihaya jirnany
anyani samyati navani dehi

**As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, similarly, the
soul accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless ones.”’
When a suit becomes old, we give it up and accept another suit;
similarly the soul is changing dresses according to desire. Because the
soul is part and parcel of God, it has godly qualities. God is the supreme
236 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

will, the supreme power, the supreme independent one, and we, being
part and parcel of Him, have all these qualities in minute quantity. We
have willing, thinking, feeling, and desiring. In the Vedas it is stated that
God is the supreme living force among all living forces (cetanas
cetananam). He is also supplying the necessities of all living entities.

We living entities are innumerable; there is no limit to our number.
God, however, is one. He is also living as we are, but we are minute particles of that living force. For example, a particle of gold is the same in
quality as a gold mine. If we chemically analyze the ingredients in a small
drop of water, we will find all of the ingredients that are to be found in the
vast ocean. In a similar way, we are one with God, being His part and
parcel. This godly particle, the soul, or the living force, is transmigrating
from aquatics to trees and plants and then from trees and plants to insect
life, then to reptile life, then to the bodies of birds and beasts. Darwin’s
theory of evolution is but a partial explanation of the transmigration of
the soul. Darwin has simply taken information from Vedic literature, but
he has no conception of the soul. The difference is that the soul is
transmigrating from aquatic life to plants and trees, then to insect life,
then to bird life, then animal life, then human life, and within human life
he moves from uncivilized life to civilized life, etc. The civilized life of a
human being represents the culmination of evolution. Here is a junction:
from this point we can again slide down into the cyclic process of evolution, or we can elevate ourselves to a godly life. The choice is up to us.
This is indicated in the Bhagavad-gita.

This human form of life actually means developed consciousness;
therefore we should not waste our lives like cats, dogs, and hogs. That is
the injunction. Although this body is perishable like a dog’s or cat’s
body, it is different in that one can attain the highest perfection in this
life. We are part and parcel of God, but somehow or other we have fallen
into this material existence; now we have to evolve in such a way that we
can go back home, back to Godhead. That is the highest perfection.

There is actually another world, a spiritual world. As stated in the
Bhagavad-gita 8.20):

paras tasmat tu bhavo ‘nyo
vyakto ’vyaktat sanadtanah

yah sa sarvesu bhitesu
nasyatsu na vinasyati

**Yet there is another nature, which is eternal and is transcendental to
this manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is never anReturning to the Eternal Religion 237

nihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that part remains as it is.”’

In this material nature, everything is created, it stays for some time,
produces some by-products, dwindles, and finally vanishes. Our bodies
are created at a certain moment by sexual intercourse. The semen of the
father emulsifies and takes a pea form, and the living entity, or soul,
takes shelter in that form, and because it takes shelter, it develops hands,
legs, eyes, etc. This development is complete in the seventh month, and
in the ninth month the human being comes out of the womb. It is because the soul is present that the child develops. If the soul is not present,
there is no development, and the child is born dead. We can take this
dead body and preserve it in chemicals, but it will not develop. Development means change of body. All of us have had baby bodies, but those
bodies are no longer existing. The body of a baby develops into the body
of a child, and that body develops into the body of a boy, and that body
develops into a youth’s body, which eventually turns into an old man’s
body. Finally the body completely vanishes. The whole cosmic manifestation, the gigantic form of this material world, is also working according to this same process. It is created at a certain point, it develops,
it is maintained, and at a certain stage it is dissolved. That is the nature of
the material world. It is manifest at a certain interval, and again it
vanishes (bhitvd bhiitva praliyate).

The word bhdva means ‘‘nature.’’ There-is another nature, which
never dissolves, which is eternal. As jivas, spirit souls, we are also eternal. This is verified in the Bhagavaa-gitd [2.20]:

na jayate mriyate va kadacin

nayam bhitva bhavita va na bhiyah
ajo nityah sasvato ‘yam purano

na hanyate hanyamane sarire

‘For the soul there is neither birth nor death. Nor, having once been,
does he ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undying,
and primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain.”’

Just as God has no birth or death, we spirit souls can have neither birth
nor death, but because we think, ‘‘I am this body,’’ we consider that we
are born and that we die. Such thinking is called maya, or illusion, and as
soon as we get out of this illusion of identifying the soul with the body,
we attain the stage called brahma-bhiuta. When one realizes aham
brahmasmi, *‘I am not this body; I am spirit soul, part and parcel of the
Supreme Brahman,”’ he attains what is called Brahman realization. As
238 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

soon as Brahman realization is attained, one becomes happy.

Is this not a fact? If you understand clearly that you have no birth and
death, that you are eternal, will you not become happy? Yes, certainly.
Thus when one is Brahman-realized, spiritually realized, he has no more
to do with hankering or lamentation. The whole world is simply hankering and lamenting. You African people are now hankering to be like
Europeans and Americans, but the Europeans have lost their empire,
and now they are lamenting. So in this way one party is hankering and
another is lamenting. Similarly, this material life is simply a combination
of hankering and lamenting. We are hankering for those things which we
do not possess, and we are lamenting for those things which we have lost.
That is our material business. If we realize, however, that we are part and
parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (Parabrahman) and that
we are Brahman, then we will transcend this hankering and lamenting.

The so-called universal brotherhood or unity that the United Nations
is trying to achieve is possible only when you come to the spiritual platform, or Brahman realization. Brahman realization is the aim of human
life. One should not work like cats, dogs, and hogs. The hog is always
very busy day and night trying to find stool, and when he finds it, he eats
it and becomes sexually agitated and has sex without discrimination. A
hog will have sex with its mother or sister or anyone else, and this is a
hog’s life. However, the scriptures indicate that the human form of life is
not meant for working hard for sense gratification like cats, dogs, and
hogs. It is meant for realizing, “‘I do not belong to this material world. I
am spirit soul and am eternal, but somehow or other I have fallen into
this conditional life of birth, old age, disease, and death.’’ This human
form of life is meant for making a solution to these four material: miseries—birth, old age, disease, and death. That is the aim of human life.
Just try to understand that human life is not meant for working very hard
like hogs and then having some sense gratification and then all of a sudden dying.

People who do not believe in the soul are in a most unfortunate condition. They do not know where they came from nor where they are going.
Knowledge of the soul is the most important knowledge, but it is not discussed in any university. But what is the constitution of this body? What

is the distinction between a dead body and a living body? Why is the body 
living? What is the condition of the body, and what is its value? No one is
presently studying these questions, but by this Krsna consciousness
movement we are trying to educate people so that they can understand
that they are not these bodies but are spirit souls. The business of human

PE ee Sd

|
|

 
Returning to the Eternal Religion 239

life is different from the business of cats and dogs. That is our message.

As far as the soul is concerned, the evolutionary process is going on,
and we are struggling for existence, struggling to come to the point of
eternal life. That eternal life is possible. If you try your best in this human
form of life, in your next life you can get a spiritual body. Your spiritual
body is already within you, and it will develop as soon as you become free
from the contamination of this material existence. That is the aim of
human life. People do not know what actual self-interest is; it is to realize
oneself, to realize, ‘‘I am part and parcel of God, and I have to return to
the kingdom of God to join with God.”’

Just as we have a social life here, God has a social life in the spiritual
kingdom. You can join Him there. It is not that after this body is finished
you become void. No. That is a wrong conception. In the Bhagavad-gita
[2.12], Krsna told Arjuna on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra:

na tv evaham jatu nasam
na tvam neme janadhipah

na caiva na bhavisyamah
sarve vayam atah param

**Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these
kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.”’

The process for attaining eternal life is very easy, and yet at the same
time very difficult. It is difficult because people in the beginning do not
believe in the existence of transmigration of the soul. However, if we
simply take knowledge from the authorities, the process becomes very
simple. Our process of Krsna consciousness is to take knowledge from
Krsna, the most perfect being, and not from an ordinary being conditioned by the laws of material nature. Knowledge taken from a conditioned being is sure to be defective.

What are the defects of the conditioned soul? He is sure to commit
mistakes, sure to be illusioned, sure to cheat others, and sure to have imperfect senses. We cannot attain knowledge perfectly, because we want to
cheat others and our senses are imperfect. Although our senses are imperfect, we are very proud of our eyes, and we want to see everything.
Therefore someone says, ‘‘Can you show me God?’”’ Actually the answer
is yes. Why can’t you see God at every moment? Krsna says, raso ‘ham
apsu kaunteya: ‘‘I am the taste of water.’’ Everyone drinks water, and the
taste is there—so if we think of this taste as God, we begin the process of
God realization. Krsna also says, prabhdsmi Sasi-siryayoh: °‘I am the
240 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

sunshine, and I am the moonshine.’’ We all see the sunshine and
moonshine every day, and if we think of how it is that the sun and moon
are emanating light, we will ultimately reach God. There are so many
similar instances. If you want to be God conscious and realize God yourself, it is not very difficult. You have simply to follow the prescribed
methods. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita [18.55], tato mam tattvato jndtva.
We must simply try to understand God in truth and try to understand His
appearance, disappearance, and functions. When we understand Him in
truth, we immediately enter the kingdom of God. After quitting this
body, the person who understands God, or Krsna, does not come back
again to accept another material body. Krsna says, mam eti: ‘‘He comes to
Me.”’ That is our aim.

Therefore we should not waste our time living like cats and dogs. We
should live comfortably, but at the same time we should be Krsna conscious, or God conscious. That will help us become happy. Without
understanding God and without becoming God conscious, there is no
possibility of peace and happiness. The way of peace and happiness is outlined in the Bhagavad-gita.

If you really want to understand God, He is very easy to understand.
God is the proprietor of everything. Isdvdsyam idam sarvam. Unfortunately we are thinking, ‘‘I am the proprietor.’’ In your country, for inStance, the British have sometimes claimed to be proprietors, and now
you are claiming to be the proprietors—so who Knows what will happen
in the future? Actually no one knows who the real proprietor is. The land
is there, and it is the property of God, but we are simply thinking, °‘I am
the proprietor. I own this, and I own that.’’ Actually, America existed
before the Europeans came, but now the Americans are thinking, ‘“‘We
are the proprietors.’’ Similarly, before them the Red Indians were thinking, ‘We are the proprietors.’’ The fact is that no man is an actual
proprietor; the proprietor is God.

isavasyam idam sarvam

yat kim ca jagatyam jagat
tena tyaktena bhufijitha

ma grdhah kasya svid dhanam

‘Everything animate or inanimate that is within the universe is controlled and owned by the Lord. One should therefore accept only those
things necessary for himself, which are set aside as his quota, and one
 

Returning to the Eternal Religion 241

should not accept other things, knowing well to whom they belong.’’
/sopanisad 1]

This realization is wanting. Krsna claims proprietorship over all
forms—including American forms, African forms, cat forms, dog forms,
tree forms, etc.—for in actuality He is the proprietor and the supreme
father. If we simply realize this, we attain God realization. Actually if we
realize God as prescribed in the authorized books and Vedic literatures,
we will find that there will no longer be quarrels between this party and
that party. Everything will be peaceful.

Everyone has the right to use God’s property, just as a son has the right
to live at the cost of his father. It is stated in the scriptures that even
a small animal in the home must be given some food. That is spiritual
communism. No one should remain hungry, not even a serpent. We are
always afraid of serpents, but if we find a serpent to be living in our
house, it is our duty to see that the serpent is also fed. This is the conception of God consciousness, or Krsna consciousness: samah sarvesu
bhitesu. One who is transcendentally situated is equally disposed to every
living entity. Thus the Bhagavad-gita points out that when one sees
everyone equally, as part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, one actually
begins his devotional life. This Krsna consciousness movement is trying
in an authoritative way to make everyone understand what he is and what
the aim of life is. This process of purification of the heart is very easily accomplished. One simply has to chant this mahd-mantra—Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare. It can actually be seen that in this movement there are
boys and girls from different countries and different religions, but no one
is concerned with any particular section, country, or religious body. We
are simply concerned about knowing ourselves and our relationship with
God.

God is the supreme proprietor, and we are all His sons, or servitors.
Therefore let us engage ourselves in the service of the Lord, as recommended in the Bhagavad-gita. AS soon as we understand that God is the
proprietor of everything, then all the troubles of the world will immediately be solved. This may take some time. It is not expected that
everyone will understand this high philosophy, but if the intelligent
people in every country try to understand it, that will be sufficient. In the
Bhagavad-gita |3.21] it is stated:

yad yad acarati sresthas
tat tad evetaro janah
242 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

sa yat pramanam kurute
lokas tad anuvartate

‘Whatever action a great man performs, common men follow in his
footsteps. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the
world pursues.”’

We therefore invite the most intelligent men in the world to understand this Krsna conscious philosophy and try to distribute it all over the
world. We have now come to these African countries, and I invite all intelligent Africans to come and understand this philosophy and distribute
it. You are trying to develop yourselves, so please develop spiritually, for
Spiritual development is sound development. Don’t imitate the
Americans and Europeans, who are living like cats and dogs. Such
civilizations built on the consciousness of sense gratification cannot
stand. The atomic bomb is already there, and as soon as the next war
breaks out, all their skyscrapers and everything else will be finished. Try
to understand this from the real viewpoint of human life, the spiritual
viewpoint. This is what this Krsna consciousness movement is about. We
therefore request you to try to understand this philosophy. Thank you
very much.
**A Devotee Always Feels Compassion
for Others’ Distress’’

“When Lord Jesus Christ presented himself, for instance, he was greatly
afflicted by the miserable conditions of the people. Regardless of which coun- —
try or sect they belong to, all Vaisnavas, or devotees—any people who are
God conscious, or Krsna conscious—are thus compassionate. ...”’

Today I shall speak to you about the glorification of the holy name of
God. This was discussed between Maharaja Pariksit and Sukadeva
Goswami in connection with a brahmana who was very fallen and addicted to all kinds of sinful activities but was saved simply by chanting the
holy name. This is found in the Sixth Canto of the Srimad-Bhdgavatam.

The universal planetary systems are very nicely explained in the Fifth
Canto of the Srimad-Bhdgavatam. Within the universe there are some
planets which are hellish. Actually, not only the Bhagavatam but all
religious scriptures contain descriptions of hell and heaven. In the
Srimad-Bhagavatam you can find out where those hellish planets are and
how distant they are from this planet, just as you can obtain information
from modern astronomy. Astronomers have calculated how far the moon
is from here and what the distance is between this planet and the sun;
similarly, the Bhadgavatam contains descriptions of the hellish planets.

We have experience of different atmospheric conditions even on this
planet. In the Western countries near the North Pole, the climate is different than in India, which is near the equator. Just as there are differences in atmosphere and living conditions on this planet, similarly
there are many planets which have different atmospheres and conditions
of life.

After hearing a description of the hellish planets from Sukadeva
Goswami, Partksit Maharaja said,

243
244 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

adhuneha maha-bhaga
yathaiva narakan narah
nanogra-yatanan neyat
tan me vyakhyatum arhasi

**Sir, I have heard from you about the hellish planets. Men who are very
sinful are sent to those planets.” [Srimad-Bhdgavatam 6.1.6] Pariksit
Maharaja is a Vaisnava [devotee], and a Vaisnava always feels compassion for others’ distress. He is very afflicted by the miseries of others.
When Lord Jesus Christ presented himself, for instance, he was greatly
afflicted by the miserable conditions of the people. Regardless of which
country or sect they belong to, all Vaisnavas, or devotees—any people
who are God conscious, or Krsna conscious—are thus compassionate.
Therefore to blaspheme a Vaisnava, a preacher of God’s glories, is a
great offense.

Krsna, God, is never tolerant of offenses committed at the lotus feet of
a Vaisnava. Krpambudhi: a Vaisnava is an ocean of mercy. Vafchda-kalpataru: everyone has desires, but a Vaisnava can fulfill all desires. Kalpataru means “‘desire tree.’’ There is a tree in the spiritual world which is
called a desire tree. In this material world, you get a particular type of
fruit from a particular type of tree, but in Krsnaloka as well as in all the
Vaikuntha planets, all the trees are spiritual and will fulfill all your
desires. That is described in the Brahma-samhita: cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vrksa.

A Vaisnava is addressed as maha-bhaga, which means ‘“‘fortunate.”’
One who becomes a Vaisnava and is God conscious is understood to be
greatly fortunate.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu has explained that the living entities are rotating
in different species of life, in different planetary systems all over the universe. A living entity can go anywhere—to hell or heaven—as he likes
and as he prepares himself. There are many heavenly planets, many
hellish planets, and many species of life. There are 8,400,000 species of
life. The living entity is rotating, wandering through these species and
creating bodies according to his mentality in the present life. As you sow,
so shall you reap.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu says that out of all these numberless living
entities who are traveling in the material world, one is fortunate, not
everyone. If everyone were fortunate, they would all have taken to Krsna
consciousness. It is being distributed freely everywhere. But why are
people not taking it? Because they are unfortunate. Therefore Caitanya
Returning to the Eternal Religion 245

Mahaprabhu says that only those who are fortunate take to this Krsna
consciousness, and they get hopeful life, pleasant life, blissful life, a life
of knowledge.

It is the duty of a Vaisnava to go door to door to make the unfortunate
people fortunate. A Vaisnava thinks, “‘How can these people be
delivered from their hellish life?’’ That was Pariksit Maharaja’s inquiry.
‘*Sir,’’ he said, ‘‘you have described that on account of one’s sinful activities one is put into a hellish condition of life or in a hellish planetary
system. Now, what are the countermethods by which such persons can
be saved?’’ This is the question. When a Vaisnava comes, when God
Himself comes, or when God’s son or His very confidential devotees
come, their only mission is to save the sinful men who are suffering.
They have knowledge of how to do this.

When Prahlada Maharaja met Nrsimhadeva, he said:

naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaranyas
tvad-virya-gayana-mahamrta-magna-cittah

Soce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyarthamaya-sukhaya bharam udvahato vimudhan

if
(

**My dear Lord,’’ Prahlada says, “‘I am not very anxious for my own
_ deliverance.’ [Bhdg. 7.9.43] Mayavadi philosophers are very careful that
their personal salvation is not interrupted. They think, ‘“‘If I go to preach
in association with others, I may fall down, and my realization will be
finished.’’ Therefore they do not come. Only the Vaisnavas come, at the
risk of falldown—but they do not fall down. They may even go to hell to
deliver the conditioned souls. This is Prahlada Maharaja’s mission. He
says, naivodvije: °‘I am not very anxious about living in this material
world.”’

Prahlada Maharaja says further, ‘‘I have no anxiety for myself because
somehow or other I have been trained to be always Krsna conscious.”’
Because he is Krsna conscious, he is confident that in his next life he is
going to Krsna. It is stated in the Bhagavad-gitd that if one executes the
Krsna conscious regulative principles carefully, it is certain that he will
reach the supreme destination in his next life.

Prahlada Maharaja continues: ‘‘There is only one source of anxiety for
me.’’ Just see—although he had no anxiety for himself, he still had anxiety. He says, Soce tato vimukha-cetasah: ‘‘1 am anxious for those persons
who are not Krsna conscious. That is my anxiety. For myself 1 have no
anxiety, but I am thinking of those who are not Krsna conscious.’’ Why
246 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

aren’t they Krsna conscious? Mayda-sukhaya bharam udvahato vimidhan.
These rascals have created a humbug civilization for temporary
happiness. :

Maya-sukhaya. Actually this is a fact. We have a humbug civilization.
So many cars are being manufactured every year, and for that purpose so
many roads have to be excavated and prepared. This creates problem
after problem. Therefore it is madyd-sukhdya, illusory happiness, and yet
we are trying to be happy in this way. We are trying to manufacture some
way to be happy, but this only creates other problems.

In your country you have the greatest number of cars, but that does
not solve any problems. You have manufactured cars to help solve the
problems of life, but I have experienced that this also creates more
problems. When my disciple Dayananda wanted to take me to a doctor in
Los Angeles, I had to take the trouble to travel thirty miles before I could
even consult the doctor. Once you create cars, then you must travel
thirty or forty miles to meet your friends.

You can fly from New York to Boston in one hour, but it takes even
longer than that just to get to the airport. This situation is called mayasukhaya. Maya means “‘false,’’ ‘‘illusory.’’ We are trying to create some
very comfortable situation, but we have created another uncomfortable
Situation. This is the way of the material world; if we are not satisfied by
the natural comforts offered by God and nature and we want to create artificial comforts, then we have to create some discomfort also. Most
people do not know that. They think that they are creating a very
comfortable situation, but actually they are traveling fifty miles to go to
the office to earn a livelihood and fifty miles to come back. Because of
such conditions, Prahlada Maharaja says that these vimudhans—these
materialistic persons, these rascals—have created an unnecessary burden
on themselves simply for temporary happiness. Vimudhdadn, mayd-sukhaya
bharam udvahato. Therefore, in Vedic civilization, it is recommended
that one free himself from material life, take sannydsa, the renounced
order of life, and prosecute spiritual life with absolutely no anxiety.

If one can execute Krsna consciousness in family life, that is very
good. Bhaktivinoda Thakura was a family man, a magistrate, and still he
executed devotional service so nicely. Dhruva Maharaja and Prahlada
Maharaja were grhasthas, householders, but they trained themselves in
such a way that even as householders they were faced with no interruption in their service. Therefore, Prahlada Maharaja says, ““I have learned
the art of always remaining in Krsna consciousness.’’ What is that art?
Tvad-virya-gayana-mahamrta-magna-cittah. Simply glorifying the vicReturning to the Eternal Religion 247

torious activities and pastimes of the Lord. Virya means ‘‘very heroic.”’

Krsna’s activities are heroic. You can read about them in Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Krsna’s name, His fame, His activities,
His associates, and all other things related to Him are heroic. Prahlada
Maharaja says in this connection, ‘‘I am certain that wherever I go, I can
glorify Your heroic activities and be safe. There is no question of my falling down. But I am simply anxious for these persons who have created a
type of civilization in which they are always busy working hard. I am
thinking of them.”’

Prahlada says further:

prayena deva munayah sva-vimukti-kama
maunam caranti vijane na parartha-nisthah
naitan vihaya krpanan vimumuksa eko
nanyam tvad asya saranam bhramato ‘nupasye

**My dear Lord, there are many saintly persons and sages who are very
interested in their own liberation.”’ [Bhdg. 7.9.44] Munayah means
‘‘saintly persons’ or ‘‘philosophers.’’ Prayena deva munayah sva-vimuktikamah: they are very interested in their own liberation. They try to live in
solitary places like the Himalaya Mountains. They do not talk to anyone,
and they are always afraid of mixing with ordinary people in the city and
becoming disturbed or maybe even falling down. They think, ‘“Better let
me save myself.”’

Prahlada Maharaja regrets that these great saintly persons do not come
to the city, where people have manufactured a civilization of very hard
work all day and night. Such saints are not very compassionate. He says,
‘‘T am anxious for these fallen people who are unnecessarily working so
hard simply for sense gratification.”’

Even if there were some point in working that hard, such people do not
know what it is. All they know its sex. Either they go to a naked dance or
to a naked club or to this or that. Prahlada Maharaja says, naitdn vihaya
krpanan vimumuksa eko: ‘‘My Lord, I do not need salvation alone. Unless
I take all these fools with me, I shall not go.’’ He refuses to go to the
kingdom of God without taking all these fallen souls with him. This is a
Vaisnava. Nanyam tvad asya saranam bhramato ’nupasye: “I simply want
to teach them how to surrender unto You. That’s all. That is my goal.”’

The Vaisnava knows that as soon as one surrenders, one’s path is
Clear. Naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaranyas tvad-virya-gayana-mahamrtamagna-cittah: ‘*Somehow or other, let them bow down before Krsna.”’
248 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

This is a simple method. All you have to do is bow down before Krsna
with faith and say, ‘‘My Lord Krsna, I was forgetful of You for so long,
for so many lives. Now I have come to consciousness; please accept me.”’
That’s all. If one simply learns this technique and sincerely surrenders

himself to the Lord, his path is immediately open. These are the philo
sophical thoughts of a Vaisnava. A Vaisnava is always thinking about
how the fallen conditioned souls can be delivered. He is always involved
in making plans in that way, just like the Goswamis. What was the business of the six Goswamis of Vrndavana, Lord Caitanya’s direct disciples?
That is stated by Srinivasa Acarya:

nana-sastra-vicaranaika-nipunau sad-dharma-samsthapakau
lokanam hita-karinau tribhuvane madnyau Saranyakarau

radha-krsna-padaravinda-bhajananandena mattalikau
vande ruipa-sanatanau raghu-yugau Sri-jiva-gopalakau

“The six Goswamis, namely, Sri Sanatana Goswami, Sri Ripa Goswami,
Sri Raghunatha Bhatta Goswami, Sri Raghunatha dasa Goswami, Sri Jiva
Goswami, and Sri Gopala Bhatta Goswami, are very expert in scrutinizingly studying the revealed scriptures with the aim of establishing
eternal religious principles for the benefit of all human beings. They are
always absorbed in the mood of the gopis and are engaged in the transcendental loving service of Radha and Krsna.”’ [Sad-gosvamy-astaka 2]
With similar Vaisnava compassion, Pariksit Maharaja says to Sukadeva
Goswami: ‘‘You have described the different types of hellish conditions
of life. Now, tell me how those who are suffering can be delivered. Kindly
explain this to me.”’
adhuneha maha-bhaga
yathaiva narakan narah
nanogra-yatanan neyat
tan me vyakhyatum arhasi

Nara means human beings, those who are fallen. Narakan narahl/
nanogra-yatanan neyat tan me: ‘‘How can they be delivered from their
fierce miseries and horrible pains?’’ That is a Vaisnava heart. Maharaja
Pariksit says, ‘“‘Somehow or other they have fallen down to this hellish
life. But that does not mean that they should remain in that condition.
There must be some means by which they can be delivered, so kindly explain that.’’
Sukadeva Goswami replied:

 
Returning to the Eternal Religion 249

na ced ihaivapacitim yathamhasah
krtasya kuryan mana-ukta-panibhih

dhruvam sa vai pretya narakan upaiti
ye kirtita me bhavatas tigma-ydtanah

‘Yes, I’ve already described the different types of hellish conditions and
very severe painful life, but one has to counteract it.’ [Bhdg. 6.1.7]

How can this be done? Sinful activities are committed in various ways.
We can commit sinful activity or thus make a plan, thinking, “‘I shall kill
that man.’’ Either way, it is sinful. When the mind is thinking, feeling,
and willing, then there is action.

The other day I was reading in a-book that if someone’s dog barks at
you when you are passing on the road, then that is an offense on the part
of the dog-owner, according to law. No one should have to be scared by
dogs barking, so one should take care of his dog. I read this. It is a law in
your country. The dog is simply barking, but it is sinful. The dog is not
responsible, because it is an animal, but because the owner of the animal
has made the dog his best friend, he is responsible by law. If an outside
dog enters your house, it may not be killed, but the owners of the dog
may be prosecuted. _ ,

Just as the barking of the dog is unlawful, so when you speak something offensive to others, that is also sinful. That is just like barking.
Therefore sinful activities are committed in so many ways. Whether we
think of sinful activities, or we speak something sinful, or we actually
commit a sinful activity, they are all considered sinful activities. Dhruvam
sa vai pretya narakan upaiti. One has to suffer punishment for such sinful
activities.

People do not believe in a next life because they want to avoid this
botheration. But we cannot avoid it. We must act according to the law, or
we will be punished. Similarly, I cannot avoid God’s law. That is not
possible. I can cheat others, commit theft, and hide myself, thereby saving myself from the punishment of the state law, but I cannot save myself
from the superior law, the law of nature. It is very difficult. There are so
many witnesses. The daylight is witness, the moonlight is witness, and
Krsha is the supreme witness. You cannot say, “‘I am committing this
Sin, but no one can see me.”’

Krsna is the supreme witness sitting within your heart. He notes down
what you are thinking and what you are doing. He also gives facility.
If you want to do something to satisfy your senses, Krsna gives the
facility for that action. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gita. Sarvasya
250 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

caham hrdi sannivisto: ‘‘I am sitting in everyone’s heart.’? Mattah smrtir
jnadnam apohanam ca: **From Me come remembrance, knowledge, and
forgetfulness. ”’

In this way Krsna gives us a chance. If you want Krsna, then He will
give you a chance to have Him, and if you don’t want Krsna, then He will
give you a chance to forget Him. If you want to enjoy life forgetting
Krsna, forgetting God, then Krsna will give you all facility so that you can
forget, and if you want to enjoy life with Krsna consciousness, then
Krsna will give you the chance to make progress in Krsna consciousness.
That 1s up to you.

If you think that you can be happy without Krsna consciousness, Krsna —
does not object to that. Yathecchasi tatha kuru. After advising Arjuna, He
simply said, ‘““Now I have explained everything to you. Whatever you
desire you can do.’”’ Arjuna replied immediately, karisye vacanam tava:
‘Now I shall execute Your order.’’ That is Krsna consciousness.

God does not interfere with your little independence. If you want to act
according to the order of God, then God will help you. Even if you fall
down sometimes, if you become sincere—‘'From this time on I shall remain Krsna conscious and execute His orders’’—then Krsna will help
you. In all respects, even if you fall down, He will excuse you and give
you more intelligence. This intelligence will say, ‘‘Don’t do this. Now go
on with your duty.’’ But if you want to forget Krsna, if you want to become happy without Krsna, He will give you so many chances that you
will forget Krsna life after life.

Pariksit Maharaja says here, ‘‘It is not that if I say there is no God then
there will be no God or I will not be responsible for what I do.’’ That is
the atheistic theory. Atheists do not want God because they are always
sinful —if they thought that there were God, then they would be forced to
shudder at the thought of punishment. Therefore they deny the existence of God. That is their process. They think that if they do not accept
God then there is no punishment and they can do whatever they like.

When rabbits are being attacked by bigger animals, they close their
eyes and think, “‘I am not going to be killed.’’ But they are killed anyway. Similarly, we may deny the existence of God and the law of God,
but still God and His law are there. In the high court you may say, “‘I
don’t care for the law of the government,’’ but you will be forced to accept the government law. If you deny the state law, then you will be put
into prison and be caused to suffer. Similarly, you may foolishly decry the
existence of God—‘‘There is no God’”’ or *‘I am God’’ —but nevertheless
you are responsible for all your actions, both good and bad.
Returning to the Eternal Religion 251

There are two kinds of activities—good and bad. If you act nicely and
perform pious activities, then you get good fortune, and if you act sinfully, then you have to suffer. Therefore Sukadeva Goswami says:

tasmat puraivasy iha papa-niskrtau
yateta mrtyor avipadyatatmana
dosasya drstva guru-laghavam yatha
bhisak cikitseta rujam nidanavit
[Bhdg. 6.1.8]

There are different kinds of atonement. If you commit some sin and
counteract it by something else, that is atonement. There are examples of
this in the Christian Bible. Sukadeva Goswami says, ‘“‘ You should know
that you are responsible, and according to the gravity of sinful life, you
should accept some type of atonement as described in the Sdstras, the
scriptures. ”’

Actually, just as when one is diseased he must go to a doctor and pay
doctor bills as a form of atonement, according to the Vedic way of life
there is a class of brahmanas to whom one should go for the prescribed
atonement according to the sins one commits.

Sukadeva Goswami says that one has to execute the prescribed atonement according to the gravity of one’s sinful life. He continues the example: dosasya drstva guru-laghavam yatha bhisak cikitseta rujam nidanavit.
When you consult a physician, he prescribes an inexpensive medicine or
a costly medicine according to the gravity of the disease. If you simply
have a headache, he may prescribe an aspirin, but if you have something
very severe, he immediately prescribes a surgical operation which will
cost a thousand dollars. Similarly, sinful life is a diseased condition, so
one must follow the prescribed cure to become healthy.

Acceptance of the chain of birth and death is a diseased condition of
the soul. The soul has no birth and death and no disease because it is
spirit. Krsna says in the Bhagavad-gita [2.20]: na jdyate, the soul has no
birth, and mriyate, it has no death. Nityah sasvato ‘yam purano/ na hanyate
hanyamane Sarire. The soul is eternal and everlasting. It is not lost with
the dissolution of this body. Na hanyate hanyamane sarire. Na hanyate
means that it is not killed or destroyed, even after the destruction of this
body.

The missing point of modern civilization is that there is no educational
system to instruct people on what happens after death. Thus we have the
most defective education because without this knowledge of what
252 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

happens after death, one dies like an animal. The animal does not know
that he is going to have another body; he has no such knowledge.

Human life is not meant for becoming an animal. One should not
simply be interested in eating, sleeping, sex life, and defense. You may
have a very nice arrangement for eating, or many nice buildings for
sleeping, or a very good arrangement for sex life, or a very good defense
force to protect you, but that does not mean that you are a human being.
That type of civilization is animal life. Animals are also interested in eating, sleeping, and sex life, and according to their own methods they defend also. Where, then, is the distinction between human life and animal
life if you simply engage in these four principles of bodily nature?

The distinction is made when a human being is inquisitive—‘*Why
have I been put into this miserable condition? Is there any remedy for it?
Is there any perpetual, eternal life? I do not want to die. I want to live
very happily and peacefully. Is there a chance of this? What is that method? What is that science?’’ When these inquiries are there and
steps are taken to answer these questions, that is human civilization; —
otherwise it is doggish civilization, animal civilization.

Animals are satisfied if they can eat, sleep, have some sex life, and
have some defense. Actually there is no defense because no one can protect himself from the hands of cruel death. Hiranyakasipu, for instance,
wanted to live forever, and so he underwent severe austerities. So-called
Scientists are now saying that we shall stop death by scientific methods.
This is also another crazy utterance. That is not possible. You may make
great advancement in scientific knowledge, but there is no scientific solution to these four problems—birth, death, old age, and disease.

One who is intelligent will be eager to solve these four prime problems.
No one wants to die. But there is no remedy. I have to die. Everyone is
very anxious to stop the increase of population by employing so many
contraceptive methods, but still, birth is going on. So there is no stoppage
of birth. You may invent up-to-date medicines by your scientific
methods, but you cannot stop disease. It is not possible just to take a
tablet to put an end to disease. )

In the Bhagavad-gita it is said, janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi-duhkhadosanudarsanam: one might think that he has solved all the problems of
his life, but where is the solution to these four problems of birth, death,
old age, and disease? That solution is Krsna consciousness.

Krsna also says in the same book,
Returning to the Eternal Religion 253

janma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva deham punar janma
naiti mam eti so ‘rjuna
[Bg. 4.9]

Every one of us is giving up our body at every moment. The last phase of
giving up this body is called death. But Krsna says, “‘If anyone understands My appearance and disappearance and My activities—not superficially but in truth—after giving up this body he never again accepts a
material body.”’

What happens to such a person? Mam eti—he returns to Krsna. If you
are to go to Krsna, then you have to prepare your spiritual body. That is
Krsna consciousness. If you keep yourself in Krsna consciousness, then
gradually you prepare your next body, a spiritual body, which will carry
you immediately to Krsnaloka, the abode of Krsna, and you will become
happy. You will live there perpetually and blissfully.
‘They Have Given Everything to Krsna—
And That Is Never a Mistake”’

In his letter to Lynne Ludwig, Srila Prabhupdada asks, “kindly forgive my
beloved disciples for any unkindness or indiscretion on their part. After all, to
give up one’s life completely for serving the Lord is not an easy thing, and
maya, or the illusory material energy, tries especially hard to again entrap
those who have left her service to become devotees. ... They have become a
little detached from maya’s love, or lust, and they want Krsna’s love, or endless, fully rewarding love, but they have not yet developed to that point,
that’s all.”

Your Grace:

Please accept this letter with Love... K-Mart; San Fernando. We have
talked with two of your boys at different times. Both had a very negative
outlook toward the people they meet.

Do not believe this is in any way as it should be.

These boys happen to represent God. This comes from within. Their
outlook must have mercy. We realize this; therefore handpick these little
peaces [sic] of heaven to place in the middle of these people. Or else it
will defeat your purpose.

Love Is. Let it be as it is; with Love or not at all.

My prayers be with you...and I beg yours with me.

Yours in God, Blessed Be,
Lynne Ludwig

My dear Lynne Ludwig,

Please accept my blessings. I beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter
from California, and I have noted the contents carefully, although due to
extensively traveling and preaching in a tour in India I have not had the
Opportunity to reply to you at length until now. Your complaint is that
you have met two of my young disciples in California and they appeared
to you to have ‘‘a very negative outlook toward the people they meet.”’
Of course, I do not know the case and what the circumstances are, but
kindly forgive my beloved disciples for any unkindness or indiscretion on
their part. After all, to give up one’s life completely for serving the Lord

254
Returning to the Eternal Religion 255

is not an easy thing, and maya, or the illusory, material energy, tries especially hard to again entrap those who have left her service to become
devotees. Therefore, in order to withstand the attack of maya and remain
strong under all conditions of temptation, young or inexperienced devotees in the neophyte stage of devotional service will sometimes adopt an
attitude against those things or persons which may possibly be harmful or
threatening to their tender devotional creepers. They may even overindulge in such feelings just to protect themselves, and thus they will appear to some nondevotees, who are perhaps themselves still very much
enamored by the material energy of maya, to be negative or pessimistic.

But the actual fact is that this material world is a miserable, negative
place, full of danger at every step; it is duhkhdlayam asasvatam, a temporary abode of death, birth, disease, and old age, a home of suffering and
pain only. To come to the platform of understanding these things as they
are is not very common, and therefore persons who attain to it are described as “‘great souls.”

mam upetya punar janma
duhkhalayam asasvatam’

napnuvanti mahatmanah
samsiddhim paramam gatah

This means that those who have understood that the material worlds are
places of misery and temporality (duhkhdlayam asasvatam) never return
here again, and because they are mahdtmanah, the great souls, Krsna
keeps them with Him because they have qualified themselves to escape
this nasty place by becoming His pure devotees. This verse is spoken by
Krsna, or God Himself, in the Bhagavad-gita [Bg. 8.15]. Who can be a
more final authority? The point is that to make advancement in spiritual
life, one must view everything material with a pessimistic eye unless it is
utilized to serve and please Krsna. We are not very much hopeful for any
lasting pleasure or satisfaction for our deepest cravings within this realm
of gross matter.

You refer to the word “‘love’’ several times in your letter, but the actual fact is that there is no love in this material world. That is false propaganda. What they call love here is lust only, or desire for personal
sense gratification:

kama esa krodha esa
rajo-guna-samudbhavah
256 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

maha-Sano maha-padpma
viddhy enam iha vairinam

Krsna tells Arjuna, His disciple, that “It is lust only ... which is the alldevouring, sinful enemy of this world.’’ [Bg. 3.37] In the Vedic language
there is no word for materialistic ‘‘love,’’ as we call it in the present day.
The word kama describes lust or material desire, not love, but the word
which we find in the Vedas for actual love is prema, meaning one’s love of
God only. Outside of loving God there is no possibility of loving. Rather,
there is lusty desire only. Within this atmosphere of matter, the entire
range of human activities—and not only every activity of human beings
but all living entities—is based upon, given impetus and thus polluted by
sex desire, the attraction between male and female. For that sex life, the
whole universe is spinning around—and suffering! That is the harsh
truth. So-called love here means that ‘‘you gratify my senses, I’ll gratify
your senses,”’ and as soon as that gratification stops, immediately there is
divorce, separation, quarrel, and hatred. So many things are going on
under this false conception of love. Actual love means love of God,
Krsna.

Everyone wants to repose his loving tendency in some object which is
in his opinion worthy. But the question is one of ignorance only, because
people have a poor fund of knowledge about where to find that supreme
lovable object who is actually worthy to accept and reciprocate their
love. People simply do not know. There is no proper information. As
soon as you have some attachment for anything material, it will kick you
upon the face, deteriorate, and disappoint you. It’s bound to dissatisfy
and frustrate you. That’s a fact. But these young boys in your country,
and all over the world, are accepting, ‘‘ Yes, that is a fact,’ and they are
getting the right information from Krsna:

bahtinam janmanam ante
jnanavan mam prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatma sudurlabhah

**After many births and deaths, he who is actually wise surrenders unto
Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great
soul is very rare.”’ [Bg. 7.19] Again Krsna uses that word mahdtma, great
soul. Therefore our devotees that you have met are not ordinary boys
and girls. No. They are to be considered actually wise, great souls because
Returning to the Eternal Religion 257

they have experienced in many births the miserable disease of material
life and have become disgusted. Therefore they are seeking higher
knowledge—they are seeking something better—and when they find
Krsna and surrender unto Him, they become mahatmas, who are actually
situated in knowledge. This material world is just like a prison house; it is
a punishing place meant to bring us to that point of becoming disgusted,
surrendering at last to Krsna, and going back to our original nature of
eternal life in bliss and complete knowledge. Therefore it is to the credit
of these devotees that they have done what is sudurlabhah, very rare
among all men in human society.

By surrendering to Krsna one will find the final object in which to invest his love: God. Love of God is present in everyone, just like fire in an
unlit match, but it is covered over. But if one somehow or other develops
his dormant love of God, and Krsna becomes his supreme adorable object, supreme friend, supreme master, or supreme lover, than he shall
never again become disappointed or unhappy. Rather, because his loving
propensity is rightfully placed:

mac-citta mad-gata-prana
bodhayantah parasparam

kathayantas ca mam nityam
tusyanti ca ramanti ca

The devotee whose life is surrendered to Krsna is always enjoying ““great
satisfaction and bliss,’’ and he is constantly enlightened, always positive,
not negative, as you say [Bg. 10.9]. The advanced devotee is the friend of
everyone. The yoga-yukto visuddhatma, purified soul engaged in loving
devotional service to Krsna, is sarva-bhutatma-bhutatma, dear to everyone, and everyone is dear to him. In another place Krsna claims that yo
mad-bhaktah sa me priyah, His devotee, who is very dear to Him, advesta
sarva-bhiitanam maitrah karuna eva ca, is not envious but is a kind friend
to all living entities. The devotee is supposed to be, furthermore, equal to
everyone (panditah sama-darsinah). He never discriminates, saying,
‘This one is good, this one is bad.’’ No.

These are descriptions of the more advanced stages of Krsna consciousness that devotees get by development of mature knowledge. At
present many of our students are young boys. They are learning gradually, and the process is so effective, certain, and authorized that if they
Stick to it they will come to the right point, as you say, of loving. But that
love is not material, so it should not be judged on the false, sentimental
258 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

platform of ordinary, mundane dealings. That is our point. Therefore to
say they are not loving may be true from the materialists’ point of view.
They have given up affection for family, friends, wife, country, race, and
so on, which is all based upon the bodily concept of life, or flickering
sense gratification. They have become a little detached from mdya’s love,
or lust, and they want Krsna’s love, or endless, fully rewarding love, but
they have not yet developed to that point, that’s all. We cannot expect
that all of a sudden your countrymen, who are addicted to so many bad
habits, will give up eating flesh, taking intoxicants, having illicit sex life,
and so many other nasty things, and overnight become great, selfrealized souls. That is not possible. That is utopian. But just being initiated as Krsna’s devotee puts one in the topmost category of human
society. Sa buddhiman manusyesu sa yuktah krtsna-karma-krt: ‘‘He is intelligent in human society. He is in the transcendental position, although
engaged in all sorts of activities.’’ And although such a devotee may not
yet have advanced to the highest level of spiritual understanding, still he
is to be considered the most exalted personality, regardless of any temporary frailties.

api cet suduracaro
bhajate mam ananya-bhak
sadhur eva sa mantavyah
samyag vyavasito hi sah

**Even if a devotee commits the most abominable actions, he is to be
considered saintly because he is properly situated.’’ [Bg. 9.30] As you
will say, ‘“To err is human.’’ Therefore in the neophyte stage we may always expect some discrepancies. Kindly see the thing in this light and
forgive their small mistakes. The big thing is that they have given everything, even their lives, to Krsna—and that is never a mistake.

Your ever well-wisher,
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami

 
An Awareness of What Is
Best and Most Beautiful

In Rome, during May of 1974, Srila Prabhupdda meets with Mr. Desmond
James Bernard O'Grady, a noted Irish poet: “My request to you is this. You
are a poet. Just describe God. You are expert in describing, and therefore I
ask you to kindly describe God in your occupation. Then your life will be
successful. ...”

Mr. O’Grady: Your edition of the Bhagavad-gita is very nice.

Srila Prabhupada: It is the fifth edition in two years.

Mr. O’Grady: In which country has the Hare Krsna movement been the
most successful?

Srila Prabhupada: Everywhere. In Africa, America, Canada, Japan,
China. But actually it has been most successful in America. Many
Americans have taken to Krsna consciousness.

Mr. O’Grady: What about here in Rome? Have you had problems with
the police?

Srila Prabhupada: We have problems everywhere. Police sometimes
harass us, but usually they become tired and eventually don’t do anything. [Laughter.]

Mr. O’Grady: The system give up? That’s marvelous. I feel very tired of
the system myself. Something is wrong with the present state of affairs.
Maybe you can give me some advice on how to beat the system.

Srila Prabhupada: You Irish people! You are never tired of fighting.
Mr. O’Grady: No. [Laughter.] It’s inside us. —

Srila Prabhupada: Actually, the fighting has been going on constantly.
Mr. O’Grady: Well, what do you suggest we do about it? I mean, is it
morally correct for me to be sitting here...

Srila Prabhupada: As long as we remain illusioned by the bodily conception of life, thinking we are these bodies, one man thinking ‘‘I am Irish,”’
another thinking ‘‘I am Italian, American, Indian,’’ and so on—as long
as this goes on, the fighting will go on. You cannot stop fighting between
dogs and cats. Why do they fight? The dog simply thinks, ‘‘I am a big

259

 

Fee ae PN En aN
260 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

dog.’’ And the cat thinks, ‘‘I am a big cat.’’ In the same way, if we think,
‘*T am an Irishman”’ or ‘‘I am an Englishman,’’ then we are no better
than the cats and dogs. As long as people remain in a bodily conception of
life, there will be fighting.

Mr. O’Grady: What was Mahatma Gandhi fighting in the House of
Commons?

Srila Prabhupada: That was another dog-ism. There is no difference. A
dog thinks, “‘I am a dog,’’ because he has the body of a dog. If I am thinking that Iam Indian because this body was born on Indian soil, then how
am I different from the dog? The bodily conception of life is simply
animalism. When we understand that we are not these bodies but are
spirit souls, there will be peace. There cannot be any peace otherwise. Sa
eva go-kharah. The Vedic literatures state that a person in the bodily concept of life is exactly like a cow or an ass. People have to transcend this inferior conception of the self. How is that done?

mam ca yo ‘vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate

Sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhuyaya kalpate

‘‘One who engages in the spiritual activities of unalloyed devotional service at once transcends the modes of material nature and is elevated to
the spiritual platform.’ [Bhagavaa-gita 14.25]

In our society, there are many Mexicans, Canadians, Indians, Jews,
and Muslims, but they no longer consider themselves Muslims, Christians, Jews, or whatever. They are all servants of Krsna. That is Brahman
realization.

Mr. O’Grady: That’s giving it a name also.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, a name must be there. But although, for example, your name is different from that of another Irishman, you nonetheless all feel that you are Irish. One’s name may be different, but that
doesn’t matter. The quality should be one. That is required. When we acquire Krsna’s quality, then, despite different names, there will be peace.
That is called so ‘ham. The names of different people in a nation may be
different, but all the people feel the same nationality. Varieties may exist,
but if the quality is the same, that is oneness, brahma-bhiita.

brahma-bhutah prasannatma
na Socati na kanksati

 
Returning to the Eternal Religion 261

samah sarvesu bhitesu
mad-bhaktim labhate param

‘One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is equally
disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional
service unto Me.”’ [Bg. 18.54]

This world is miserable for the materially infected person, but for the
devotee, the entire world is as good as Vaikuntha. For the impersonalist,
achieving the Brahman stage, becoming one with the Absolute, is the last
word.

Mr. O’Grady: Is the Absolute external or internal?

Srila Prabhupada: There is no external or internal. The Absolute is
without duality.

Mr. O’Grady: OK, but on an individual level...

Srila Prabhupada: We are not absolute. When we are situated on the absolute platform, we are absolute. However, now we are in the relative
world. The Absolute Truth is here also, but our senses are not suffciently elevated to understand that Absolute Truth. As long as we are
under the control of time, there is no question of becoming absolute.
Mr. O’Grady: So “‘absolute’’ means life beyond time?

Srila Prabhupada: That is stated in the Bhagavad-gita [4.9]:

janma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatah

tyaktva deham punar janma
naiti mam eti so ’rjuna

*‘One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.”’

That is absolute—going back home, back to Godhead. As long as one
is in the material world and identifies with this body, he transmigrates
from one body to another. That is not absolute. This is clearly stated
here. When one goes back to the spiritual world, he attains the absolute
position.

Mr. O’Grady: All right, but this is my question: Is it sufficient for us to
sit here—you sitting there and we as friends sitting with you engaging in
the gentle art of conversation, while across the ocean...

Srila Prabhupada: The point you have missed is that although you are
262 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

sitting in one place and I am sitting in a different place, this difference
does not affect our actual existence. We are both human beings. The conceptions of ‘‘Irishman,’’ ‘‘Englishman,”’’ ‘‘Protestant,’’ ‘‘Catholic,’’ and
so on are but different dresses. One has to become free from these designations. When one is thus free, he becomes purified.

sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam
tat-paratvena nirmalam
hrsikena hrsikesasevanam bhaktir ucyate
[ Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.1.12]

When you have purified your senses and engaged those purified senses in
the service of the master of the senses, Krsna, you have perfected your
life. That is nonduality, and that is absolute.

Mr. O’Grady: But the system insists that you think yourself American or
Indian or African or whatever.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Materialistic society means duality.

Mr. O’Grady: But that is unavoidable. How can you avoid material existence?

Srila Prabhupada: That is possible in Krsna consciousness. The lotus
lives in the water but never touches the water.

Mr. O’Grady: I don’t think you can explain situations in one area with
metaphors from another. How can you argue political problems in terms
of vague spiritual concepts? Their nature is completely different.

Srila Prabhupada: Sometimes a variety of examples helps us to understand or appreciate the problem better. In the vase there is a variety of
flowers, and that variety helps us better appreciate the idea of flowers.
From any point of view, Krsna can resolve all problems. Why just the
problems of Irishmen or Englishmen? All problems. That is called unity
in diversity. Our students come from different backgrounds, but because
they are all in Krsna consciousness, they are unified.

Mr. O’Grady: Very good. Yes, I accept that. I would like to know,
though, that when you say ‘‘Krsna consciousness,’’ is there any difference between that and Christ consciousness?

Srila Prabhupada: No, there is no difference. Christ came to preach the
message of God. If you actually become Christ conscious, you become
Krsna conscious.

Mr. O’Grady: And does becoming Krsna conscious or God conscious
mean becoming self-conscious? That is, conscious of who we really are?
Returning to the Eternal Religion 263

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, God consciousness includes self-consciousness,
but self-consciousness is not necessarily God consciousness.

Mr. O’Grady: But it may be?

Srila Prabhupada: No.

Mr. O’Grady: One may achieve consciousness of the God that is within.
Srila Prabhupada: That means he is God conscious. You are now in the
sunlight, and consciousness of the sun includes your ability to see yourself. In the darkness you cannot see yourself. At night you can’t even see
your own hands or legs, but if you come before the sun, you see the sun
and yourself also. Without sunlight, without God consciousness, selfconsciousness is incomplete. However, God consciousness makes selfconsciousness very clear.

Mr. O’Grady: We meet a lot of young people in our teaching profession,
and we don’t try to teach them any kind of didactic salvation. We do try
to direct them toward an awareness of what is best and what is most
beautiful and what is most spiritually nourishing in the world about
them —that is, insofar as the system allows us. Very frequently the students are not neutral enough to be in a spiritual condition; they are more
in an emotional one. What we are faced with often is the basic question of
*“Who am I?”’ or, “What is it all about?”’

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Mr. O’Grady: Or they ask, ‘“Why am I here?”’

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, very good.

Mr. O’Grady: We are asked, ‘‘Why should I be here? Who are you,
teacher, and what gives you the right to tell us what to think or what to be
or what not to be? Why should I read Shakespeare? Why should I listen
to Mozart? I prefer Bob Dylan.’’ These kind of questions seem to emanate from a very disillusioned state of mind, and insecurity, and uncertainty, and a lack of credibility in the total structure of things as they are.
Frequently we have to answer these questions in a cataclysmic sort of
way. Rather than presenting direct answers, we must answer indirectly,
taking account of the conditioning that prompted students to ask these
questions in the first place. Do you think that we should try to reach them
more directly?

Srila Prabhupada: You are talking about the problem of...

Mr. O’Grady: Modern education.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. So many questions are there, but they are not
answered by modern education. ‘“Why have I come here? What is the
purpose?’’ These questions should be answered perfectly. Therefore the
Vedas enjoin: tad-vijidnartham sa gurum evabhigacchet. To find answers to
264 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

all these questions, one must approach a bona fide spiritual master.
Mr. O’Grady: What if you have none? What if we are told that Mr.
Nixon is the bona fide spiritual master? What do we do?

Srila Prabhupada: No, no. [Laughter.] There is a standard for bona fide
Spiritual masters. You have only heard one line of the verse. Who is the
Spiritual master? That is the next line: srotriyam brahma-nistham. The
word Srotriyam refers to one who has heard from another bona fide
source. A spiritual master is he who has taken the message from another
qualified spiritual master. This is just like a medical man who has taken
the knowledge of medical science from another medical man. Similarly,
the bona fide spiritual master must come in a line of successive spiritual
masters. The original spiritual master is God.

Mr. O’Grady: Yes. Granted.

Srila Prabhupada: One who has heard from God explains the same
message to his disciples. If the disciple doesn’t change the message, he is
a bona fide spiritual master. That is our process. We take lessons by hearing from Krsna, God, and from Him understand who is perfect. Or we
hear from His representative, who does not contradict Krsna and who
has realized His message. It is not that we speak one thing and do all nonsense. One who does so is not a spiritual master.

Mr. O’Grady: Now there’s my poor old father, living west of Ireland. A
simple old man, seventy-eight years now, your generation. He has gotten
to the point at his age where he says, ““They tell me, the priests, they tell
me ultimately that it’s God who knows. But I want to know who told
God.’’ Then he comes to me and says, ‘‘You went to school, and you
read books. Tell me, who told God?”’’ So I have no answer. That is the
difference between seventy-eight and thirty-nine years.

Srila Prabhupada: No, it is not a difference of age. The difference is
knowledge. In the Brahma-sutra the question is raised: Who is God? First
of all there is this question.

Mr. O’Grady: Who taught God?

Srila Prabhupada: No. First of all there is the question who isGod. Then
we shall ask who taught God. The Veddanta-sttra says, athato brahmajijidsa: now we should inquire who is God. Unless you know who God is,
how can you raise the question of who instructed God? If you don’t know
God, the question does not arise who instructed God. Is this not so?
Mr. O’Grady: Yes. |

Srila Prabhupada: Who God is, is explained in the Brahma-sitra. Janmady asya yatah: God is He from whom everything emanates. That is
God—the Supreme Being from whom everything emanates. Now, what
Returning to the Eternal Religion 265

is the nature of that Supreme Being? Is He a dead stone or a living entity?
That is also explained. Janmddy asya yato ‘nvaydd itaratas carthesv
abhijfiah svarat [Srimad-Bhdgavatam 1.1.1]: the Supreme Being is fully
cognizant of everything, directly and indirectly. Unless He is fully cognizant of everything, He cannot be God. Then the question that you
raised comes, Who taught God? And that is also answered. Svarat: He is
fully independent. He does not need to take lessons from anyone. That is
God. If one needs to take lessons from others, he is not God. Krsna
spoke the Bhagavad-gita, and He did not have to learn it from anyone. I
had to learn it from my spiritual master, but Krsna did not have to learn it
from anyone. One who does not need to take lessons from others is God.
Mr. O’Grady: Where does human love come in?

Srila Prabhupada: Everything is coming from God. Being part and
parcel of God, we manifest partial love because the original love is there
in Him. Nothing can exist if it is not in God; therefore love is there in
God.

Mr. O’Grady: And manifestations of love are manifestations of God?
Srila Prabhupada: Unless the loving propensity is there in God, how can
we manifest it? A son born of a particular father has the symptoms of the
father. Because the loving propensity is in God, we have that same
propensity.

Mr. O’Grady: Maybe love is generated in you by the need.

Srila Prabhupada: No, there is no question of ‘‘maybe.’’ We are defining God in absolute terms. Janmddy asya yatah: God is He from whom
everything has emanated. The fighting propensity is also there in God,
but His fighting and His loving are absolute. In the material world we experience that fighting is just the opposite of loving, but in God the fighting propensity and the loving propensity are one and the same. That is
the meaning of ‘“‘absolute.’’ We learn from the Vedic scriptures that
when the so-called enemies of God are killed by God, they attain
liberation.

Mr. O’Grady: Is it possible to arrive at this understanding of God alone?
Srila Prabhupada: No. Therefore we have cited this verse: tadviindnartham sa gurum evabhigacchet. The word abhigacchet means
‘‘must.’’ It is not possible alone. In Sanskrit grammar this is called the
vidhilin form of a verb, and this form is used when there is no choice. The
word abhigacchet means that one must approach a guru. That is the Vedic
version. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gita you will find that Arjuna was
talking to Krsna, but when he saw that things were not being resolved, he
surrendered himself to Krsna and accepted Him as his guru.
266 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

karpanya-dosopahata-svabhavah
prechami tvam dharma-sammudha-cetah
yac chreyah syan niscitam bruhi tan me
sisyas te "ham Sadhi mam tvam prapannam

**Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because
of weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me clearly what is
best for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul surrendered unto You.
Please instruct me.”’’ [Bg. 2.7] So here we can see that Arjuna is confused
about his duty.

Mr. O’Grady: Is this duty to the self, to others, or to the state?

Srila Prabhupada: A soldier’s duty is to fight with the enemy. Arjuna
was a Soldier, and Krsna advised him, “‘The opposite party is your
enemy, and you are a soldier. Why are you trying to be nonviolent? This
is not good.”’ Then Arjuna said, ‘‘ Actually, Iam confused. In this confusion I cannot make the right decision. I therefore accept You as my spiritual master. Please give me the proper lesson.”’ In a chaotic condition, in
a confused state of life, one should approach another, who is in full
knowledge of the matter. You go to a lawyer to solve legal problems, and
you go to a physician to solve medical problems. Everyone in the material world is confused about spiritual identity. It is therefore our duty to
approach a bona fide spiritual master, who can give us real knowledge.
Mr. O’Grady: I am very confused.

Srila Prabhupada: So you must approach a spiritual master.

Mr. O’Grady: And he makes a decision on how to help me stop this
confusion?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, the spiritual master is one who solves all confusion. If the spiritual master cannot save his disciple from confusion, he is
not a spiritual master. That is the test.

samsara-davanala-lidha-lokatranaya karunya-ghanaghanatvam

praptasya kalyana-gunarnavasya
vande guroh Sri-caranadravindam

This whole confused world is just like a blazing forest fire. In a forest fire
all the animals are confused. They do not know where to go to save their
lives. In the blazing fire of the material world, everyone is confused. How
can that blazing forest fire be extinguished? It is not possible to utilize
your man-made fire brigade, nor is it possible to simply pour buckets of
Returning to the Eternal Religion 267

water. The solution comes when rain from the clouds falls on the forest
fire. Only then can the fire be extinguished. That ability is not in your
hands, but is in the mercy of God. So, human society is in a confused
State, and it cannot find a solution. The spiritual master is one who has
received the mercy of God, and he can deliver the solution to the confused man. One who has received the mercy of God can become a spiritual master and deliver that mercy to others.

Mr. O’Grady: The problem is to find this spiritual master.

Srila Prabhupada: That is not the problem. The problem is whether you
are sincere. You have problems, but God is within your heart. /svarah
sarva-bhitanam. God is not far away. If you are sincere, God sends you a
Spiritual master. Therefore God is also called caitya-guru, the spiritual
master within the heart. God helps from within and from without. Everything is thus described in the Bhagavad-gita. This material body is like a
machine, but within the heart is the soul, and with the soul is the Supersoul, Krsna, who gives directions. The Lord says, ‘“You wanted to do
this; now here is the chance. Go and do it.’’ If you are sincere, you say,
‘‘Now, God, I want You.’’ Then He will give you directions. ‘“Yes, now
you come and get Me like this.’’ This is His kindness. However, if we
want something else, that is all right. We can have it. God is very kind.
When I want something, He is in my heart directing me and telling me
how to have it. So why should He not give directions on how to have a
Spiritual master? First of all we must again be eager to revive our God
consciousness. Then God will give us a spiritual master.

Mr. O’Grady: Thank you very much.

Srila Prabhupada: Thank you very much. My request to you is this. You
are a poet. Just describe God. You are expert in describing, and therefore
I ask you to kindly describe God in your occupation. Then your life will
be successful. And if one hears you, his life will also be successful. That is
the injunction:

idam hi pumsas tapasah Ssrutasya va
svistasya stiktasya ca buddhi-dattayoh
avicyuto 'rthah kavibhir nirtipito
yad uttamasloka-gundnuvarnanam
[Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.5.22]

There are many leaders in society who are poets, scientists, religionists,
philosophers, politicians, and so on. Those who are so expert are given
this injunction: your duty is to perfect your occupation by describing the
glories of the Supreme Being.
268 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Mr. O’Grady: My experience is that, for some extraordinary reason, one
is chosen to do a particular thing.

Srila Prabhupada: That reason is given here. Avicyutah. The infallible
choice is this: ‘Let them describe the glories of the Lord.’’

Mr. O’Grady: But you were saying that the spiritual master is chosen.
The spiritual master, the poet, the priest, is chosen by God. This person
is chosen to write poems or paint pictures or make music.

Srila Prabhupada: So when you compose music, compose music about
God. That is your perfection.

Mr. O’Grady: When one works for God in his line, then his line becomes his perfection?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Mr. O’Grady: Thank you very much.
VII.
Reaching
Life's
‘**The Human Form of Life
Is Meant for God Realization’’

Srila Prabhupdda gives an address at London’s Conway Hall, in 1969:
“..Zf one thinks like that—‘I am no one else’s servant; my business is to
serve God’—then he is liberated. His heart is immediately cleansed, and he is
liberated. And after one has reached that, then all one’s cares and anxieties in
this world are over, because one knows, ‘Iam a servant of God. God will give
me protection. Why should I worry about anything?’”’

Today’s subject matter is our relationship with God. That is selfrealization. The sankirtana movement is the easiest process for selfrealization because it cleanses the heart. Our misunderstanding of our
identity is due to the dust covering the mirror of the mind. In a mirror
which is covered with dust one cannot see himself. But if it is very clear,
then one can see himself. So meditation is a process for cleansing the
heart. Meditation means to try to understand one’s relationship with the
Supreme.

With everything with which we come in contact there is a relationship.
Because I am now sitting on this cushion, the relationship is that I shall
sit and the cushion will hold me. You have relationships. You are
Englishmen or Indians, so there is a relationship with your society, with
your family, with your friends. So what is our relationship with God?

If you ask everyone, very few people will be able to explain their relationship with God. They say, ‘“What is God? God is dead. I don’t believe
in God, not to speak of a relationship.’’ Because these dirty things are
covering their hearts, they cannot see. We have a relationship with
everything —why do we not try to understand our relationship with God?
Is that very intelligent? No. That is ignorance. All the creatures in this
material world are covered by the three modes of material nature.
Therefore they cannot see God. They cannot understand God, nor do
they try to understand Him. But God is there. In England in the morning
there is mist, so you cannot see the sun behind the fog. But does this
mean that there is no sun? You cannot see it because your eyes are
covered. But if you send a telegram to another part of the world, they will
say, ‘“Yes, the sun is here. We can see it. It is very dazzling, full of light.”’

270
Reaching Life’s Perfection 271

So when you deny the existence of God or you cannot ascertain your
relationship with God, that means that you are lacking in knowledge. It is
not that there is no God. We are lacking. The sun is not covered. The sun
cannot be covered. The fog or the cloud or the mist does not have the
power to cover the sun. How big the sun is! It is so many times bigger
than this earth. And the clouds can cover at most ten or twenty or a
hundred miles. So how can the clouds cover the sun? No. The clouds
cannot cover the sun. They cover your eyes. When an enemy comes and
a rabbit cannot defend himself, the rabbit closes his eyes and thinks,
**My enemy is now gone.”’ Similarly, we are covered by the external energy of God and are thinking, ‘‘God is dead.”’

The Lord has three kinds of energies. In the Visnu Purdna there are descriptions of the energy of the Supreme Lord. And in the Vedas also, in
the Upanisads, there are descriptions of the energies of the Supreme
Lord. Pardsya saktir vividhaiva srityate [Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8]. Sakti
means “‘energy.’ The Lord has multienergies. The Vedas say, ““God has
nothing to do.’’ We have to work because we have no other means to exist—we have to eat, we wish to enjoy this, that—but why should God
work? God does not have to work. Then how can we say that God created
this universe? Is that not work? No. Then how did it happen? His
multifarious energies are so strong that they are acting naturally and are
full of knowledge. We can see how a flower blooms and grows and
systematically displays multicolors: one side a little spot, another side a
little spot, white on one side, more white on the other side. The butterfly
also exhibits such artistic symmetry. So this is all being painted, but in
such a perfect way and so swiftly that we cannot see how. We cannot
understand how it is being done, but it is being done by the energy of the
Lord.

It is due to a lack of knowledge that people say that God is dead, that
there is no God, and that we have no relationship with God. These
thoughts have been compared to the thoughts of a man haunted by a
ghost. Just as a haunted man speaks all nonsense, when we become
covered by the illusory energy of God we say that God is dead. But this is
not a fact. Therefore, we need this chanting process to cleanse our heart.
Take to this simple process of chanting the Hare Krsna mantra. In that
way, in your family life, in your club, in your home, on the road—everywhere—chant Hare Krsna, and this darkness covering your heart, covering your real position, will be removed. Then you’ll understand your real
constitutional position. |

Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu recommended: ceto-darpana-marjanam.
272 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Marjanam means “‘cleanse,’’ and darpanam means “‘mirror.’’ The heart
is a mirror. It is like a camera. Just as a camera takes all kinds of pictures
of days and nights, so also our heart takes pictures and keeps them in an
unconscious state. Psychologists know this. The heart takes so many pictures, and therefore it becomes covered. We do not know when it has
begun, but it is a fact that because there is material contact, our real identity is covered. Therefore ceto-darpana-marjanam: one has to cleanse his
heart. There are different processes to cleanse the heart—the jfdna process, the yoga process, the meditation process, pious activities. Karma
also cleanses the heart. If one acts very piously, his heart will gradually be
cleansed. But although these processes are recommended for cleansing
the heart, in this age they are all difficult. To follow the path of philosophical Knowledge one must become a very learned scholar, one must
read so many books, one must go to learned professors and scholars and
speculate. One must search out a person who has seen the light. So these
are all philosophical processes. Meditation is also a recommended process. One should question, ‘‘What am I?’’ Just consider: Am I this body?
No. Am I this finger? No, this is my finger. If you contemplate your leg,
you will see, ‘‘Oh, this is my leg.’’ Similarly, you will find everything to
be ‘‘mine.’’ And where is that ‘‘I’’? Everything is mine, but where is that
“>? When one is searching for that ‘‘I,’’ that is meditation. Real
meditation means concentrating all the senses in that way. But that
meditation process is very difficult. One must control the senses. The
senses are dragging one outward, and one has to bring them inward for
introspection. Therefore there are eight processes in the yoga system.
The first is controlling the senses by regulative principles. Then sitting
postures—that will help to concentrate the mind. If one sits leaning over,
that will not help; if one sits up straight, that will help. Then controlling
the breathing, then meditation, then samadhi. But today these are very,
very difficult processes. No one can immediately perform them. The socalled yoga processes are fragmental—only the sitting postures and a few
breathing exercises are practiced. But that cannot bring one to the perfectional stage. The actual yoga process, although a recommended Vedic
process, iS very difficult in this age. Similarly one can try to get knowledge by the speculative philosophical process: ‘This is Brahman, this is
not Brahman, so what is Brahman? What is spirit soul?’’ Such empiric
philosophical discussion is also recommended, but it is useless in this
age.

Therefore Caitanya Mahaprabhu—not only Caitanya Mahaprabhu but
also the Vedic literature—says:
Reaching Life’s Perfection 273

harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam

kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha

Kalau means “‘in this age.’’ Nasty eva, nasty eva, nasty eva—three times
nasty eva. Eva means “‘certainly,’’ and ndasti means ‘‘not.’’ ‘‘Certainly
not, certainly not, certainly not.’’ What is that “‘certainly not’’? One cannot realize oneself by karma. That is the first ‘‘certainly not.’’ One cannot
realize oneself by jndna. That is the second ‘“‘certainly not.’’ One cannot
realize oneself by yoga. Certainly not. Kalau. Kalau means “‘in this age.”’
Kalau nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha. In this age one certainly
cannot achieve success by any of these three methods. Then what is the
recommended process? Harer naéma harer naéma harer namaiva kevalam.
Simply chant the Hare Krsna mantra. Kevalam means ‘‘only.’’ Simply
chant Hare Krsna. It is the easiest and most sublime process. This is
recommended, practical, and authorized. So take it. Accept it in any condition of life. Chant. There is no expenditure, there is no loss. We are not
chanting a secret. No. It is open. And by chanting you will cleanse your
heart.

In this material world no one wants misery, but it comes. Unexpectedly, like a forest fire that starts without anyone’s striking a match, it
comes. No one wants a war, but war is fought. No one wants famine, but
famine comes. No one wants pestilence, but it comes. No one wants
fighting, but there is fighting. No one wants misunderstanding, but there
is. Why? This is like a blazing fire in the forest. And it cannot be extinguished by fire engines. This blazing fire of problems cannot be extinguished by our so-called advancement of knowledge. No. That is not
possible. Just as one cannot extinguish a forest fire by sending a fire
engine or by bringing some water, the problems of our life cannot be
solved by material processes.

There are many examples. Prahlada Maharaja says, ‘‘My dear Lord,
the father and mother are not actually the protectors of the children.”’
The father and mother take care of their children; that is their duty. But
they are not the ultimate protectors. When nature’s law calls the child,
the father and mother cannot protect him. Therefore although generally
it is considered a fact that the father and mother are the protectors of the
child, actually it is not a fact. If someone is sailing the ocean and he
thinks he has a very nice seat, will that protect him? No. Still he may
drown. A nice airplane is flying in the sky, everyone is safe, but all of a
274 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

sudden it crashes. Nothing material can protect us. Suppose someone is
diseased. He may engage a good physician who gives good medicine, but
that will not guarantee that he will live. Then what is the ultimate
guarantee? Prahlada Maharaja says, ‘“‘My dear Lord, if You neglect someone, nothing can protect him.”’

This is our practical experience. We can invent so many methods to
solve the problems presented by the laws of material nature, but they are
not sufficient. They will never solve all the problems, nor will they give
actual relief. This is the fact. Therefore Krsna says in the Bhagavada-gita,
** Maya, this external energy, is very, very strong. No one can surpass it.
It is almost impossible.’’ Then how can one get free from this material
nature? Krsna says, “Simply by surrendering unto Me one can get relief
from the onslaught of material nature.’’ That is a fact. So we have to
cleanse the heart to learn what is our relationship with God.

In the Katha Upanisad it is stated, nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam.
The Supreme Absolute Personality of Godhead, or the Absolute Truth,
is eternal. God is eternal, and we are also eternal. But the Vedas indicate
that He is the supreme living creature. He is not dead. If He is not living,
how is this world working? In the Bhagavad-gitd Krsna says, “‘Under My
supervision things are going on.’’ In the Bible also it is said, ‘‘God created.’’ That is a fact. Not that at one time there was a chunk and then this
happened and then that. No. The Vedas tell us the actual facts, but we
have to open our eyes to see. Ceto-darpana-marjanam. That is the process
of cleansing our hearts. When we cleanse our hearts, then we will be able
to understand what Krsna and the Vedas say. We need to be purified. Ifa
man is suffering from jaundice and you give him a piece of sugar candy,
he will say that it is very bitter. But is sugar candy bitter? No, it is very
sweet. And the medicine for jaundice is that sugar. Modern science
prescribes this, and it is prescribed in the Vedic literature also. So if we
take a great quantity of this sugar candy, then we will be relieved from
jaundice. And when there is relief, then one says, “Oh, this is very
sweet.’ So the modern jaundice of a godless civilization can be cured by
this chanting of Hare Krsna. In the beginning it may appear bitter, but
when one advances, then he will see how pleasing it 1s.

As soon as one understands his identity, his relationship with God,
then immediately he becomes happy. We are so full of miseries because
we have identified ourselves with the material world. Therefore we are
unhappy. Anxieties and fearfulness are due to our misidentifying with
the material world. The other day I was explaining that one who identifies
with this bag of bones and skin is like an animal. So by chanting Hare
Reaching Life’s Perfection 275

Krsna this misunderstanding will be cleansed. Cleansing of the heart
means that one will understand that he does not belong to this material
world. Aham brahmasmi:\1am spirit soul. As long as one identifies oneself
with England, with India, or with America, this is ignorance. Today you
are an Englishman because you were born in England, but in your next
life you may not take your birth in England; it may be in China or Russia
or some other country. Or you may not get this human form of body.
Today you are a nationalist, you are a very great follower of your country,
but tomorrow if you stay in your country you may be a cow being taken to
the slaughterhouse.

So we have to thoroughly know our identity. Caitanya Mahaprabhu
says that the actual identity of every living creature is that he is the eternal servant of God. If one thinks like that—‘‘I am no one else’s servant;
my business is to serve God’’—then he is liberated. His heart is immediately cleansed, and he is liberated. And after one has reached that,
then all one’s cares and anxieties in this world are over because one
knows, “‘I am a servant of God. God will give me protection. Why should
I worry about anything?’’ It is just like a child. A child knows that his
mother and father will take care of him. He is free. If he should go to
touch fire, his mother will take care of him: ‘‘Oh, my dear child, don’t
touch.’ The mother is always looking after him. So why don’t you put
your trust in God? Actually, you are under the protection of God.

People go to church and say, ‘‘God, give us our daily bread.’’ Actually,
if He did not give it to us, we would not be able to live. That is a fact. The
Vedas also say that the one Supreme Personality supplies all the
necessities of every other living creature. God is supplying food for
everyone. We human beings have our economic problem, but what
economic problem is there in societies other than human society? The
bird society has no economic problem. The beasts have no economic
problem. There are 8,400,000 species of life, and out of that, human
society is very, very small. So they have created problems—what to eat,
where to sleep, how to mate, how to defend. These are a problem to us,
but the majority of creatures—the aquatics, the fish, the plants, the insects, the birds, the beasts, and the many millions upon millions of other
living creatures—do not have such a problem. They are also living creatures. Don’t think that they are different from us. It is not true that we
human beings are the only living creatures and that all others are dead.
No. And who is providing their food and shelter? It is God. The plants
and animals are not going to the office. They are not going to the univerSity to get technological education to earn money. So how are they
276 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

eating? God is supplying. The elephant eats hundreds of pounds of food.
Who is supplying? Are you making arrangements for the elephant?
There are millions of elephants. Who is supplying?

So the process of acknowledging that God is supplying is better than
thinking, ‘‘God is dead. Why should we go to church and pray to God for
bread?”’ In the Bhagavad-gitd it is said, ‘Four kinds of people come to
Krsna: the distressed, those who are in need of money, the wise, and the
inquisitive.’’ One who is inquisitive, one who is wise, one who is distressed, and one who is in need of money—these four classes of men approach God. ‘‘My dear God, Iam very hungry. Give me my daily bread.”’
That’s nice. Those who approach God in this way are recommended as
sukrtinah. Sukrtimeans ‘‘pious.’’ They are pious. Although they are asking for money, for food, they are considered pious because they are approaching God. And others are just the opposite. They are duskrtinah,
impious. Krti means ‘‘very meritorious,’’ but the word duskrti indicates
that their energy is being misused to create havoc. Just like the man who
invented atomic weapons. He has a brain, but it has been misused. He
has created something which is dreadful. Create something which will insure that man will no longer have to die. What is the use of creating
something so that millions of people will immediately die? They will die
today or tomorrow or after a hundred years. So what have the scientists
done? Create something so that man will not die immediately, so that
there will be no more disease, so that there will be no more old age. Then
you will have done something. But the duskrtinas never go to God. They
never try to understand God. Therefore their energy is misdirected.

The gross materialists who ignore their relationship with God are described in the Bhagavad-gita as muidhas. Midha means “‘ass,”’ ‘“donkey.”’
Those who are working very, very hard to earn money are compared to
the donkey. They will eat the same four capdtis [whole wheat breadpatties] daily, but they are unnecessarily working to earn thousands of
dollars. And others are described as naradhama. Narddhama means “‘the
lowest of mankind.’’ The human form of life is meant for God realization. It is the right of man to try to realize God. One who understands
Brahman, God, is a braéhmana, not others. So that is the duty of this
human form of life. In every human society there is some system which
is called ‘‘religion’’ and by which one may try to understand God. It
doesn’t matter whether it is the Christian religion, the Muhammadan
religion, or the Hindu religion. It doesn’t matter. The system is to understand God and our relationship with Him. That’s all. This is the duty of
the human beings, and if this duty is ignored in human society, then it is

 
Reaching Life’s Perfection 277

animal society. Animals have no power to understand what is God and
their relationship with God. Their only interests are eating, sleeping,
mating, and defending. If we are only concerned with these things, then
what are we? We are animals. Therefore the Bhagavad-gita says that
those who ignore this opportunity are the ‘“‘lowest of mankind.’’ They got
this human form of life after evolving through 8,400,000 births and yet
did not utilize it for God realization but simply for the animal propensities. Therefore they are narddhama, the lowest of mankind. And there
are other persons who are very proud of their knowledge. But what is that
knowledge? ‘‘There is no God. I am God.’’ Their actual knowledge has
been taken away by maya. If they are God, then how have they become
dog? There are so many arguments against them, but they simply defy
God. Atheism. Because they have taken to the process of atheism, their
actual knowledge is stolen away. Actual knowledge means to know what
is God and our relationship with God. If one does not know this, then it
is to be understood that his knowledge has been taken away by maya.
So in this way, if we try to understand our relationship with God, there
are ways and means. There are books, and there is knowledge, so why
not take advantage of them? Everyone should take advantage of this
knowledge. Try to understand that in the Bhagavad-gita and other Vedic
literatures, everywhere, it is said that God is great and that although we
are qualitatively one with God, we are minute. The ocean and the minute
particle of water have the same quality, but the quantity of salt in the
drop of water and the quantity of salt in the ocean are different. They are
qualitatively one but quantitatively different. Similarly, God is allpowerful, and we have some power. God creates everything, and we can
create a small machine to fly, just like the small machines with which
children play. But God can create millions of planets flying in the air.
That is the qualification of God. You cannot create any planets. Even if
you can create a planet, what is the benefit of that? There are millions of
planets created by God. But-you also have the creative power. God has
power, and you have power. But His is so great that yours cannot compare to it. If you say, ‘“‘I am God,”’ that is foolishness. You can claim that
you are God, but what acts have you performed so extraordinary that you
can claim that you are God? This is ignorance. The knowledge of one
who thinks himself God has been taken away by the spell of maya. So our
relationship is that God is great and we are minute. In the Bhagavad-gita
Krsna clearly says, ‘‘All living entities are My parts and parcels.
Qualitatively they are one with Me, but quantitatively they are different.’’ So we are simultaneously one with and different from God. That

 
278 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

is our relationship. We are one because we have the same qualities as
God. But if we study ourselves minutely, we will find that although we
have some great qualities, God has them all in greater quantities.

We cannot have anything which is not in God. That is not possible.
Therefore in the Vedanta-sutra it is said that everything that we have is
also found in God. It is emanating from God. So our relationship is that
because we are small, because we are minute, we are the eternal servitors
of God. In this material world also, in ordinary behavior, we see that a
man goes to serve another man because the other man is greater than he
and can pay him a nice salary. So naturally the conclusion is that if we are
small, our duty is to serve God. We have no other business. We are all
different parts and parcels of the original entity.

A screw which is connected with a machine is valuable because it is
working with the whole machine. And if the screw is taken away from the
machine, or if it is faulty, it is worthless. My finger is worth millions of
dollars as long as it is attached to this body and is serving the body. And if
it is cut off from this body, then what is it worth? Nothing. Similarly, our
relationship is that we are very small particles of God; therefore our duty
is to dovetail our energies with Him and cooperate with Him. That is our
relationship. Otherwise we are worthless. We are cut off. When the finger
becomes useless the doctor says, ‘‘Oh, amputate this finger. Otherwise
the body will be poisoned.’’ Similarly, when we become godless we are
cut off from our relationship with God and suffer in this material world. If
we try to join again with the Supreme Lord, then our relationship is
revived.
The Highest Love

“Spiritual life means to be in association with the Supreme Lord and to exist in
bliss and knowledge eternally. Such eternal association means to play with
Krsna, to dance with and love Krsna. Or Krsna can become your child—
whatever you like. ... Unless one can love Krsna, unless one finishes with
love for cats, dogs, country, nation, and society and instead concentrates his
love on Krsna, there is no question of happiness... .”

If one protects the tender creeper of devotional service nicely, then
gradually it will produce the fruit of unalloyed love for God. Unalloyed
love for God means love that is not tinged by desire for material benefit,
for mere philosophical understanding, nor for fruitive results. Unalloyed
love is to know, ‘‘God is great, I am His part and parcel, and therefore He
is my supreme lovable object.’’ This consciousness is the highest perfection of human life and the ultimate aim of all methods of self-realization.
If one reaches this point—God is my only beloved, Krsna is the only
lovable object—then one’s life is perfect. And when one tastes that transcendental relationship with Krsna, then one feels real happiness. The
devotional creeper will then be so strongly protected that just by catching
hold of it, one will be able to reach the supreme destination. If one climbs
steadily up a tree, one eventually comes to the very top. Similarly, if one
can achieve love of Godhead by catching that devotional creeper, there is
no doubt that one will reach the transcendental abode of Krsna and will
associate with Him personally, just as we are associating here, face to
face.

God is not fictional or imaginary. He is as real as we are. (Actually, we
are under illusion; we are living as if this body were our factual self, although this body is not at all reality, but only a temporary manifestation.)
We dare to presume that there is no God or that He has no form. This
mental speculation is due to a poor fund of knowledge. Lord Krsna and
His abode exist, and one can go there, reach Him, and associate with
Him. That is a fact. Spiritual life means to be in association with the
Supreme Lord and to exist in bliss and knowledge eternally. Such eternal

279
280 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

association means to play with Krsna, to dance with and love Krsna. Or
Krsna can become your child— whatever you like.

There are five primary relationships with Krsna: as a passive devotee,
as a servant, as a friend, as a parent, and as a lover. The cows in Krsna’s
abode are also liberated souls. They are called surabhi cows. There are
many popular pictures showing how Krsna loves the cows, how He
embraces and kisses them. That passive relationship with Krsna is called
santa. Their perfect happiness is achieved when Krsna comes and simply
touches them.

Other devotees are inclined to actually give service. They think,
**Krsna wants to sit down. I will arrange a place for Him. Krsna wants to
eat. I will get Him some nice food.’’ And they actually make these arrangements. Other devotees play with Krsna as friends on equal terms.
They do not know that Krsna is God; to them, Krsna is their lovable
friend, and they cannot forget Him for a moment. All day and all night,
they think of Krsna. At night, when they are sleeping they think, ‘‘Oh, in
the morning I shall go and play with Krsna.’’ And in the morning they go
to Krsna’s house and stand by while Krsna is decorated by His mother
before going out to play with His friends in the fields. There is no other
activity in Krsnaloka (Krsna’s abode). There is no industry, no rushing
to the office, or any such nonsense. There is sufficient milk and butter,
and everyone eats plentifully. Krsna is very fond of His friends, and
sometimes He enjoys stealing butter for them. One can actually live this
way, and that is the perfection of existence. We should hanker for that
perfectional stage of life. Krsna consciousness is the process to attain it.

But as long as one has even a slight attachment for this material world,
one has to remain here. Krsna is very strict. He does not allow anyone to
enter into His association who has any tinge of the material conception of
life. Bhakti must be free from material contamination. Do not think, “‘I
am a very learned scholar. I shall find out what is the Absolute Truth by
mental speculation.’’ That is nonsense; one can go on and on speculating
and will never find the source of all sources. It is said in the Brahmasamhita, ‘‘One can go on speculating about the Absolute Truth for
millions and millions of years, and still it will not be revealed.’’ One can
rot in this material world as he is and can go on speculating, but that is
not the right process. Here is the process— bhakti-yoga.

Lord Caitanya says that to render devotional service to Krsna is the
highest perfectional stage of life, and compared to this, other things for
which people are hankering in this material world are like bubbles in the
ocean. Generally, people are after rewards, arid therefore they become
Reaching Life's Perfection . 281

religious. They say, ‘‘I am a Hindu,”’ ‘‘I am a Christian,’’ ‘‘I am a Jew,”’
‘‘T am Muhammadan,”’ “I am this, I am that, and therefore I cannot
change my religion. I cannot accept Krsna.’’ This is called religiosity,
dharma. With such a materialistic, sectarian idea of religion, they will rot
in this material world, stuck to rituals and faith. They are under the impression that if they follow their religious principles, they will get material prosperity. Of course, if one sticks to any kind of religious faith, he
will get facilities for material life.

Why do people want this material prosperity? For sense gratification.
They are thinking, °‘I shall have a very nice wife. I shall have very good
children. I shall have a very good post. I shall become president. I shall
become prime minister.’’ This is sense gratification. And when one is
frustrated and has seen that to be rich or to attain the presidency cannot
give him happiness, after squeezing out all the taste of sex life, when he
is completely frustrated, then perhaps he takes to LSD and tries to become one with the void. But this nonsense cannot give happiness. Here is
happiness: one must approach Krsna. Otherwise, it will end in LSDconfusion and roaming in impersonal void concepts. People are frustrated. They must be frustrated if they do not have genuine spiritual life,
because a person is spiritual by nature.

How can anyone be happy without Krsna? Suppose one is thrown into
the ocean. How can he be happy there? That is not for us. One may be a
very good swimmer, but how long will he be able to swim? He eventually
becomes tired and drowns. Similarly, we are spiritual by nature. How can
we be happy in this material world? It is not possible. But men are trying
to remain here, making so many temporary adjustments for survival.
This patchwork is not happiness. If one really wants happiness, here is
the process: one must attain love of Godhead. Unless one can love
Krsna, unless one finishes with love for cats, dogs, country, nation, and
society and instead concentrates his love on Krsna, there is no question
of happiness. Rupa Goswami has given a very nice example in this
regard: there are many drugs which saturate one with ideas or hallucinations. But Ripa Goswami says that unless one tastes that final drug of
love of Godhead, Arsna-prema, he will have to be captivated by meditation, impersonal monism, and so: many other distractions.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu describes that to attain unalloyed love of Krsna,
one has to execute devotional service, or Krsna consciousness. One has
to engage oneself exclusively in serving Krsna. The highest perfectional
Stage of unalloyed devotion is to be free from all material desires, all
mental speculation, and all fruitive activities. The basic principle of
282 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

unalloyed devotion is that one cannot maintain any desire other than to
become fully Krsna conscious. Even if one knows that all other forms of
God are also Krsna, one should not worship any other form, but should
concentrate on the Krsna form. Krsna has many forms, but one only has
to worship Krsna in His form with the flute, as in the Radha-Krsna Deity.
Simply concentrate on that form, and all mental speculation and fruitive
activities will fall away. One has to cultivate Krsna consciousness favorably, and that means to execute service by which Krsna becomes
satisfied. Krsna consciousness is not attained by manufacturing one’s
own way. I may think that I am doing something in Krsna consciousness,
but who has sanctioned it? For instance, in the Bhagavad-gita, Arjuna
hesitated to fight, for certain moral reasons, but he was viewing the situation from the platform of fruitive activities, on which one has to enjoy or
suffer the results. He was considering that if he killed his family members, he would then be subjected to many reactions. This conclusion,
however, was not sanctioned by Krsna. The law of action and reaction in
the material world is called karma, but devotional service transcends
karma.

Unalloyed love must be free of all tinges of fruitive activities (karma)
and all tinges of mental speculation and material desire. That unalloyed
devotional service should be favorably fixed on Krsna. ‘‘Favorably”’
means in accordance with what He desires. Krsna desired that the Battle
of Kuruksetra take place; it was all arranged by Him. Arjuna was told,
‘*You are thinking in your own way, but even if you do not fight, rest
assured that because it has been arranged by Me, none of these warriors
who are assembled here are going back to their homes. They will be
killed here. It has already been arranged.’’ God’s desire is such that one
cannot change it. Krsna has two qualities: He can protect, and He can also
kill. If He wants to kill someone, there is no power in the world that can
protect him, and if He protects someone, there is no power in the world
that can kill him. Krsna’s desire is supreme. Therefore, we have to
dovetail our desires with Krsna’s. Whatever Krsna desires, no one can
make null and void because He is the Supreme Lord. Therefore, our duty
is to dovetail our acts with Krsna’s desire, not to manufacture an action
and then declare: °‘I am doing this action in Krsna consciousness.’’ We
have to be very careful to ascertain whether Krsna actually wants it. Such
authorized knowledge is instructed by the representative of Krsna. In our
prayers of praise to the spiritual master we are singing daily, “‘If the spiritual master is satisfied, then God will be satisfied. And if one dissatisfies
his spiritual master, then there is no way for him to please God.”’
Reaching Life’s Perfection 283

Therefore, as far as possible, one has to execute the order of one’s
Spiritual master. That will enable one to progress. That is the essence of
the favorable execution of Krsna consciousness. In my old age, I have
come to America, and I am trying to teach Krsna consciousness because
my spiritual master gave me an order that I must do it. It is my duty. I do
not know whether I shall be a success or failure. It doesn’t matter; my
duty is completed if I can present before you whatever I have heard from
my spiritual master. This is called the favorable execution of Krsna consciousness. Those who are actually serious should take the order of
Krsna through the representative of Krsna as their entire life and soul.
One who sticks to this principle is sure to progress. Caitanya Mahaprabhu
spoke in that way, and my spiritual master used to say, °‘The spiritual
master is the transparent via medium.’’ For example, I can see the letters
of this book very nicely through these transparent eyeglasses, without
which I cannot see because my eyes are defective. Similarly, our senses
are all defective. We cannot see God with these eyes, we cannot hear
Hare Krsna with these ears, we cannot do anything without the via
medium of the spiritual master. Just as a defective eye cannot see without the via medium of spectacles, so one cannot approach the Supreme
Lord without the transparent via medium of the spiritual master.
‘Transparent’? means that the via medium must be free of contamination. If it is transparent, one can see through it.

In unalloyed love of Godhead we have to engage our senses—sarvendriya, all the senses. This means that sex is also to be engaged in
Krsna consciousness. The conception of God as a father or mother does
not allow the engagement of one’s sex in the service of the Lord because
there is no sexual relationship with the father and mother. But in the conception of God as a lover, there is sexual engagement also. Therefore,
Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave the most perfect information of our engagement with the Supreme Lord. In other religious conceptions of life, God
is at the utmost taken as the father or mother. Many worshipers in India
take goddess Kali to be the representation of God. Of course, that is not
sanctioned, but the belief is there, and also in the Christian religion the
conception of God is as a father. But Caitanya Mahaprabhu informs us
that one can even have sexual engagement with the Lord. This informa- —
tion is Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s unique contribution. In this material
world, sexual engagement is considered to be the highest engagement,
the greatest pleasure, although it exists only in a perverted form. No one,
however, has conceived that there can be sexual engagement in the spiritual world. There is not a single instance of such theology anywhere in
284 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

the entire world. This information is given for the first time by Caitanya
Mahaprabhu: one can have the Supreme Personality of Godhead as one’s
husband, as one’s lover. This is possible in the worship of Radha and
Krsna, but no one, especially the impersonalists, can understand RadhaKrsna. The impersonalists have no idea; they cannot even conceive that
God has form. But Caitanya Mahaprabhu says that not only does God
have form, but He has sex life also. This is the highest contribution ol
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

One can serve the Supreme Lord in various relationships, but in the
material world those relationships exist only as perverted reflections.
What is our engagement in relationship to this material world? What are
our ideas of society, friendship, and love? They are all based on the material conception of life. In our society, someone is engaged as a father or
mother to a son, and others are engaged as husband and wife, lover and
beloved. There are other rasas (relationships) also, such as to be engaged
with another as an enemy. There are twelve different relationships, out
of which five are predominant. The other seven are indirect relationships, such as, for example, to be someone’s enemy. There is usually a
relationship between enemies, even between a murderer and the one he
murders. As far as our relationship with Krsna is concerned, however,
even if one establishes a relationship as His enemy, then his life is successful. Therefore, when one engages his senses with Krsna, a relationship can be established in one of twelve different varieties, of which five
varieties are direct and seven are indirect.

When Krsna appeared in the arena of Karnsa, there were many big
wrestlers prepared to kill Him. In fact, He was invited there to be killed.
His enemy Karmsa thought, “‘Soon the boys will come. We have tried for
sixteen years to kill them, but that boy Krsna could not be killed. But
now I have invited Him as a guest, and when He arrives He will fight with
these wrestlers, and they will kill Him.’’ The demonic or atheistic people
are always thinking of Krsna, or God, in terms of killing Him. Therefore
they present their theories that God is dead. They think that if God becomes dead, then they will be free to act however they please. But as far
as their actual activities are concerned, God may be dead or alive, but
God’s agent, the material energy, is so strong that no one can freely do
any wrong. As soon as anyone does something wrong, there is immediate
punishment. It does not require the preserice of God. God may be dead
or alive, but the material energy is sufficient to punish anyone who violates the material laws, even to the slightest degree. God has set these
conditions, but foolish people do not understand.

 
Reaching Life’s Perfection 285

Lord Caitanya, however, speaks of favorably engaging all the senses in
the service of Krsna in pure devotional life. One should favorably engage
one’s senses and should do whatever Krsna wants. Yet even if one
engages one’s senses against the will of Krsna but still thinks of Krsna,
that is also advantageous. The demon Putana, for example, thought of
killing Krsna. Just as the occupation of godly persons is to serve God, so
the demons and atheists are always prepared to kill God. Pitana thought,
‘*T shall kill Krsna. He is only a child.’’ This is another mistake of the
demonic. They think Krsna, or God, to be an ordinary child or man. So
in this way Puitanda was thinking: ‘“Let me smear my breast with poison,
and when the child goes to suck my milk, He will die.’’ As we study this,
we see that she approached Krsna as His enemy, and yet He accepted her
as a friend because He is so merciful. He did not take the demonic portion of her mentality, but He accepted her. Every living entity is conditioned, but Krsna is not. A doctor or psychiatrist treats madmen, but he
does not become mad. Sometimes a patient may become angry with him
or call him ill names, but the doctor is sober and simply treats him.
Similarly, if someone regards Krsna as his enemy, Krsna does not become his enemy.

Putana came to poison Krsna, but He took it otherwise. He thought, ‘I
have sucked her breast milk. Therefore she has become My mother.’’
Krsna treated her as His mother, and therefore she became liberated to
the same position as Krsna’s real mother, YaSoda. The conclusion is that
the highest perfection is to establish a favorable relationship with Krsna,
but even if one engages himself unfavorably, Krsna is so merciful that
He at least gives one salvation. All the enemies killed by Krsna were
immediately liberated.

Two classes of men may merge into the impersonal brahmajyoti: he
who is intentionally aspiring to merge into the impersonal brahmajyoti
may enter, and those who are enemies of Krsna and are killed by Him
may also do so. Therefore, the devotee concludes, Why should I accept a
condition which is offered even to God’s enemies?

Caitanya Mahaprabhu recommends pure devotional service. There
should be no desire to fulfill one’s own material desires, there should be
no attempt to understand Krsna by experimental philosophy, and there
should be no fruitive activities to derive material benefits from Krsna.
The only desire should be to serve Him favorably, as He desires. If Krsna
wants something, then we should do it. Suppose I were to ask a disciple,
‘“My dear student, please give me a glass of water.’’ It is then his duty to
give me a glass of water. If he thinks, “‘Prabhupada wants a glass of water,
286 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

but why not give him something better? Why not a glass of hot milk?”
that is not service. In his consideration, hot milk is very palatable and is
better than water, yet because I have asked for water, he has to give me
water, not milk. That is favorable service. One has to understand what
Krsna wants. When there is that intimate relationship, then one can
serve Krsna most favorably. And as long as there is not that intimate
relationship, one must take information of what Krsna wants through the
transparent medium of the spiritual master.

A Vaisnava never thinks that he has a direct relationship with Krsna.
Lord Caitanya says, “‘I am the servant of the servant of the servant of the
servant—a hundred times the servant of the servant—of Krsna.’’ We
have to agree to become the servant of the servant of the servant. This is
the process of disciplic succession, and if one wants real, transcendental
love of God, then he has to adopt this process. Because people do not accept this process, they do not develop real love of God. They speak of
God, but actually they do not love God; because there is no cultivation of
pure devotional service, they love dog.

We may say, “‘love of God,’’ but unless we adopt this principle, then
we will have to love dog, not God. That is the mistake. Caitanya Mahaprabhu says that if one really wants love of God, then one has to follow
the process of pure devotional service. It is not that Caitanya Mahaprabhu is speaking out of His own mental concoction; His statements are
confirmed in Vedic scriptures such as the Ndrada-pancaratra and the
Srimad-Bhagavatam. These two books, and the Bhagavad-gita, are very
authentic scriptures meant for devotees. Caitanya Mahaprabhu quotes
from a verse in the Narada-pancaratra: Hrsikena hrsikesa-sevanam bhaktir
ucyate. This is the definition of pure devotional service. Hrsikena
hrsikesa-sevanam. Hrsikena means ‘‘by one’s senses.’? We have to
engage our senses; it is not that we engage only our minds. If someone
says, ‘“‘I am always thinking of Krsna,’’ that is not pure devotional service. Meditation is thinking, but no one thinks of Krsna; they think of
void or something impersonal. If someone is thinking of Krsna or
Narayana or Visnu, as prescribed in the Vedic scriptures, that is real yoga;
yoga meditation means to focus one’s mind upon the Supersoul. The
Supersoul is the representation of Krsna in the form of four-handed
Narayana. Even Patafiyali, an authority on the yoga system, prescribes
meditation on Visnu. But just as people are manufacturing bogus
religious processes, the so-called yogis of today have manufactured their
own way of thinking of something void.

But the Ndrada-pancaratra says, hrsikena hrsikesa-sevanam: one must
Reaching Life’s Perfection 287

engage not only one’s mind but one’s senses. Engage the senses in the
service of the master of the senses. These three Sanskrit words are very
significant. Hrsikesa means ‘“‘the Lord of the senses.’ So bhakti-yoga
means to serve with the senses the Lord of the senses. The Lord of the
senses is Krsna. We should always remember that we have our senses because we wanted to enjoy this material world, and therefore the Lord has
given us a particular set of senses for our enjoyment. The hog has a particular type of body and senses because he wanted to enjoy eating stool.
Similarly, a man has a particular type of body and senses because he
wanted to enjoy something else. We have a particular set of conditioned
senses with which to enjoy this material world, and this is what we have
to purify. Our senses are original, but now they are covered by material

desires. We have to cure ourselves and become free from such desires.
- When one’s senses are no longer inclined toward material sense gratification, one’s status is called pure devotion.

From this verse of the Nadrada-pancaratra, we can understand that the
spirit soul has original senses. However small a body it may have entered,
the spirit soul is not impe#rsonal, it has senses. Perhaps one may find a
bug on one’s book. It is so small, smaller than a pinpoint, but still it
moves; it has all the senses. The small bacteria also move, and they have
their senses. Originally, all living entities have senses. It is not that the
senses have developed under certain material conditions. The atheistic
theory is that under material conditions we have developed senses, that
in the spiritual condition there are no senses, and that we are impersonal.
By logic and reason, however, that cannot be so. A minute particle of
Spiritual force, even if it is smaller in size than an atom, has its senses.
These senses, being covered by material elements, manifest themselves
in a perverted way. We have to purify the senses, and when the senses
are purified, we can engage them for the pleasure of the master of senses.
Krsna is the master and proprietor of the senses. Therefore, because we
are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, our senses are borrowed from
Him; they are on rental. The best thing is to use the senses for His
sense satisfaction, and not for our own. This is the process of pure Krsna
consciousness.

From the Srimad-Bhagavatam, Lord Caitanya gives an example of pure
devotion: it is said in the Bhdgavatam that Krsna is situated in everyone’s
heart. Therefore, just as rivers flow and their natural tendency is to reach
the sea, so aS soon as one hears the glories of the Lord, his soul is
at once attracted toward the Supreme Lord. This is the beginning of pure
devotional service. As soon as there is the chanting vibration, Hare
288 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Krsna, immediately Krsna’s paraphernalia, Krsna’s name, Krsna’s fame,
Krsna’s abode, Krsna’s associates—everything—all of a sudden become
manifested within because He is present. This is the beginning of one’s
Krsna consciousness. To remember by reference to a context means that
as soon as one hears a code word, one at once remembers all the information behind that code. Similarly, when our minds are attracted to Krsna
and everything about Krsna simply by hearing a little glorification of His
qualities, that is the beginning of pure Krsna consciousness. Then there
iS nO more gati, or movement of the mind.

It was just that way with the gopis: as soon as they heard the sound of
Krsna’s flute, they gave up everything. Some of them were lying down,
some were working in their family affairs, some were taking care of their
children, but as soon as they heard Krsna’s flute, they forgot everything
and rushed to Him. Their husbands, their brothers, and their fathers
said, ‘““Why are you going and leaving your duty?’’ But they did not
care—they simply left. There is no impediment and no stumbling block
in that merge of the mind with Krsna. This is the beginning of pure
devotion.

Purusottama means Krsna. The word purusa means “‘enjoyer.’’ The
conditioned living entities are false enjoyers, imitation enjoyers. Here in
this material world, all living entities are acting as purusas. The more exact meaning of purusa is “‘male.’’ The male is considered to be the enjoyer, and the female is considered to be the enjoyed. In the material
world, whether one has a male or a female body, everyone has the propensity to enjoy, and therefore everyone is called purusa. But actually the
only purusa is the Supreme Lord. We living entities are His energy, and
He is the supreme enjoyer. We are not purusa. Energies are employed for
enjoyment, and we are energies, instruments of the Supreme Person.
Therefore Purusottama is the supreme transcendental person, Krsna.
When our pure devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead is employed and there are no impediments or stumbling blocks, that is the
symptom of pure Krsna consciousness.

There is no ambition or motive in pure Krsna consciousness. Every
other transcendental function or mode of worship is backed by a motive:
someone wants salvation, someone wants material prosperity, someone
wants to go to a higher planet, someone wants to go to Krsnaloka. These
ambitions should not be there. A pure devotee has no-such ambitions. A
pure devotee does not even desire to go to the supreme abode of Krsna.
Of course, he goes, but he has no desire. He simply wants to engage himself fully in Krsna’s service.
Reaching Life’s Perfection . 289

There are different kinds of salvation. There is sdlokya liberation, to
live on the same planet as the Supreme Lord. The residents of the
Vaikuntha planets live on the same planet as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Sarsti liberation means to have almost the same opulence as
Narayana. The liberated individual soul can appear just like Narayana,
with four hands, the four emblems, almost the same bodily features, the
same opulence, the same ornaments, the same buildings, everything.
Sartipya means to have the same form or features. S@mipya means never
to be far away but always to be associated with the Supreme Lord. For example, just as we are sitting together, so one can associate with the Lord.
This is called s@mipya-mukti, the liberation of being nearer. Pure devotees, however, do not accept these various forms of liberation. They only
want to be engaged in Krsna’s service. They are not concerned with any
kind of liberation. Those who are actually Krsna conscious achieve the
association of the Supreme Lord, but they do not desire it; their only ambition is to be engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
The highest perfection of devotional service, or Krsna consciousness, is
exhibited when a devotee refuses to accept any benediction or profit from
the Supreme Lord. Prahlada Maharaja was offered whatever he liked, he
had only to ask for it, but he said, ‘“My Lord, I am Your eternal servant.
It is my duty to serve You, so how can I accept any benefit from it? Then I
would not be Your servant; I would be a merchant.’’ He replied in that
way, and that is the sign of a pure person. Krsna is so kind that He fulfills
all the desires of a devotee, even if he wants material benedictions. If at
the bottom of the devotee’s heart there is some desire, He also fulfills
that. He is so kind. But the sublime position of bhakti-yoga, or devotional
service, is that a pure devotee refuses to accept the various kinds of
liberation, even if offered by the Supreme Lord.

If one has material desires or motives within himself, and for fulfillment of such desires he engages himself in devotional service, the result
will be that he will never get pure love of God. If one is thinking, ‘‘I am
engaged in Krsna consciousness, in Krsna’s devotional service, because I
want such and such an opulence,”’ that desire may be fulfilled, but he will
never get such unalloyed love of Krsna as the gopis had. If one has a motive, even though he discharges his devotional duty, he still will not be
able to reach the stage of pure love of Godhead. In a verse from the
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, Rapa Goswami says, ‘‘As long as one desires
some material benefit [bhukti], or even if he wants salvation [muktil,
then he must take those ghostly representations.’’ As long as that maya
exists within one’s heart, how can one enjoy the spiritual bliss derived
290 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

from pure love of Godhead? In other words, if one has material desires,
or even a desire for salvation, he cannot attain pure love of Godhead. |
Pure devotion is devoid of all desires—it is simply to render loving service for its own sake.

There is a nice example in the life of Ripa Goswami. Ripa Goswami
and his brother Sanatana Goswami were living separately in Vrndavana
and going on with their bhajana, devotional service. Ripa was living in
the forest, and there was no facility for cooking nice food or begging from
the village for a capati to eat. Ripa Goswami was the younger brother,
and he thought, “‘If I could get some foodstuffs, then I could prepare nice
dishes and offer them to Krsna and invite my elder brother.’’ He had that
desire. The next moment, a nice girl about twelve years old came and
delivered an abundance of foodstuffs— milk, flour, ghee, etc. That is the
Vedic system; sometimes householders present foodstuffs to mendicants
and sages in the renounced order of life. Ripa Goswami was very glad
that Krsna had sent so many things and that he could now prepare a feast.
He prepared a feast and then invited his elder brother.

When Sanatana Goswami came, he was astonished. ‘‘How have you
secured such things? You have prepared such a nice feast in this forest.
How is it possible?”’

So Ripa Goswami explained, ‘‘In the morning I desired for it, and by
chance Krsna sent me all these things. A nice girl came, and she offered it
to me.’’ He was describing the girl: ‘‘A very nice girl.’’

Then Sanatana said, ‘This nice girl is Radharani. You have taken service from Radharani, the Lord’s eternal consort. It is a great blunder.”’
That is their philosophy. They would not accept service from the Lord.
They simply wanted to render service. But Krsna is so clever that He also
wants to serve His devotee. He looks for an opportunity to serve His
devotee. This is spiritual competition. A pure devotee does not want anything from Krsna; he simply wants to serve Him. And Krsna also looks
for the opportunity to serve His devotee. Krsna is always as anxious to
please His devotee as the devotee is to please Him.

This is the transcendental world. On the absolute plane, there is no exploitation. Everyone wants to serve; no one wants to take service. In the
transcendental world, everyone wants to give service. You want to give
service to me, and I want to give service to you. This is such a nice attitude. This material world means that I want to pickpocket you, and you
want to pickpocket me. That’s all. This is the material world. We should
try to understand it. In the material world, everyone wants to exploit his
friend, his father, his mother, everyone. But in the transcendental world,
Reaching Life’s Perfection 291

everyone wants to serve. Everyone has Krsna as the central point of serving, and all the devotees, either as friends or servants or parents or lovers
of Krsna, all want to serve Him. And at the same time, Krsna also wants
to serve them. This is a transcendental relationship; the main function is
service, although there is no necessity of service, for everyone is full.
There is no hunger, there is no necessity of eating, but still everyone
offers nice things to eat. This is the transcendental world. Unless we attain the stage of simply serving Krsna or His devotee, we cannot relish
the transcendental pleasure of service. If we have any motive, then that
sense will never be awakened. Without a motive, without desire for personal sense gratification, service should be rendered to the Supreme
Lord and His devotees.
Approaching Krsna With Love

“This is the formula—we should not try to satisfy our senses separately but
should try to satisfy Krsna’s senses. Then naturally we will become satisfied. A
Krsna conscious person is always trying to give satisfaction to Krsna....”

When Krsna was on this earth, all the residents of Vrndavana loved
Him. Indeed, they knew nothing but Krsna. They did not know whether
Krsna is God or not God, nor were they disturbed by such thoughts as,
‘*T shall love Krsna if He is God.’’ Their attitude was one of pure love,
and they thought, ‘‘He may or may not be God—it doesn’t matter. We
love Krsna, that’s all.’’ This then is the platform of real, unalloyed love.
When one thinks, “‘If Krsna is God, I shall love Him,’’ it should be
known that this is not the platform of pure love but of conditional love.
While on earth, Krsna exhibited extraordinary powers, and the vrajavasis, the residents of Vrndavana, often thought, ‘‘Oh, Krsna is such a
wonderful child. Maybe He is some demigod.’’ They thought in this way
because people were generally under the impression that the demigods
were all-powerful. Within the material world the demigods are powerful,
but people are not aware that Krsna is above all of them. The highest of
the demigods, Brahma, gave his opinion of this matter in the verse
isvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah: ‘‘Krsna is the supreme
— controller, and His body is full of knowledge, bliss, and eternality.’’ Little
did the residents of Vrndavana know of Krsna’s power as the ultimate
controller and master of all the demigods. What is noteworthy is that
their love for Him was not subject to such considerations.

As the residents of Vrndavana loved Krsna unconditionally, similarly
Krsna loved them unconditionally. Vraja-jana-vallabha giri-vara-dhari.
When the inhabitants of Vrndavana stopped performing sacrifices to
Lord Indra, the chief demigod of the heavens, they placed themselves in
a very dangerous position. Indra became very angry and sent powerful

292
Reaching Life’s Perfection 293

clouds which rained over Vrndavana incessantly for seven days. The
whole area began to flood, and the inhabitants became very disturbed.
Although He was only seven years old, Krsna saved the inhabitants of
Vrndavana by lifting Govardhana Hill and holding it up as an umbrella to
shield the village. Lord Krsna thus taught the demigod Indra that his disturbances could be stopped simply by His little finger. Seeing this, Lord
Indra bowed down before Krsna.

Thus Krsna also became known as Gopijana-vallabha, which indicates
that His only business is to protect the gopi-jana. This Krsna consciousness movement aims at teaching people how to become gopi-janas, or
pure lovers of Krsna. When we reach that stage of pure love of God, the
Lord will save us from any danger, even if it means His lifting a hill or a
mountain. Krsna did not have to practice some yoga system in order to
lift Govardhana Hill. As God, He is all-powerful, even as a child. He
played like a child and dealt with others like a child, but when there was
need, He manifested Himself as God Almighty. That is the nature of
Krsna, or God: He does not have to practice meditation or follow some
system of yoga in order to become God. He is not a manufactured type of
God, but is God eternally.

Although He is God, He enjoys loving relationships with His devotees,
and in order to satisfy His devotees, He often takes roles that appear to be
subsidiary. Krsna often likes being the child of a devotee, and thus He
became the beloved child of YaSoda, YaSoda-nandana. Because He is God
and everyone worships Him, no one chastises Him. However, Krsna enjoys being chastised by His devotee father and mother, and because
Krsna takes pleasure in being chastised, the devotees also take up the
role, saying, ‘‘All right, I shall become Your father and chastise You.’’
Similarly, when Krsna wants to fight, one of His devotees becomes the
demon Hiranyakasipu and fights with Him. In this way, all Krsna’s activities are carried out in connection with His devotees. If we aspire to become such associates of Krsna, we must develop Krsna consciousness,
awareness of Krsna.

Yasoda-nandana vraja-jana-ranjana. Krsna’s only business is satisfying
the vraja-janas, and their only business is satisfying Krsna. This is the
reciprocation of love. Yamunda-tira-vana-cari: Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, wanders on the banks of the Yamuna to please the
gopis, the cowherd boys, the birds, the bees, and the cows and calves.
These are not ordinary birds, bees, cows, calves, or men; they have all
reached the summit of self-realization and thus, after many, many lives,
have attained a position whereby they can play with Krsna. This Krsna
294 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

consciousness movement can enable everyone to go to Krsnaloka and
become Krsna’s associate as a friend, servant, father, or mother. Krsna is
agreeable to take any of these positions in relation ‘to His devotee. How
He does so is all described in our book Teachings of Lord Caitanya. To
realize our relationship with Krsna, we have but to follow in the footsteps
of Lord Caitanya and His chief associates, the six Goswamis—Sri Rupa,
Sanatana, Sri Jiva, Gopala, Raghunatha dasa, and Raghunatha Bhatta.
These Goswamis were always engaged in chanting Hare Krsna and dancing in ecstasy. They taught that when one is merged in Arsna-kirtana, or
the chanting of the holy names of Krsna, he merges into the ocean of
love of Krsna. As soon as the sound of Krsna’s name is vibrated, one can
immediately merge into the ocean of love. That is the sign of pure devotion. Thus at kirtanas the six Goswamis would merge immediately into
the ocean of love of Godhead.

The six Goswamis were dear not only to the other devotees of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu but to the nondevotees as well. A pure devotee’s
position is that he has no enemy because he is not envious. A pure devotee is always open to everyone, and he does not discriminate that this
person can be allowed to chant Hare Krsna and that person should not be
allowed. On the material platform, which is a platform of dualism, there
are differences between high and low, man and woman, and this or that,
but on the spiritual platform there are no such distinctions. The pure
devotee, seeing everything with an equal mind, is therefore nonenvious.
Because he is nonenvious, he is worshipable. Indeed, it may even be said
that a person is worshipable simply if he is nonenvious, for it is only
possible to be nonenvious on the spiritual platform. This is also the verdict of the Bhagavaa-gita [5.18-19]:

vidya-vinaya-sampanne
brahmane gavi hastini

suni caiva Svapake ca
panditah sama-darsinah

ihaiva tair jitah sargo
yesam samye sthitam manah
nirdosam hi samam brahma
tasmad brahmani te sthitah

‘‘The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a
learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog, and a dog-eater.

 

|
|

 
Reaching Life’s Perfection 295

Those whose minds are established in sameness and equanimity have
already conquered the conditions of birth and death. They are flawless
like Brahman, and thus they are already situated in Brahman.”’

Such a position can be obtained by one who has acquired the mercy of
Lord Caitanya. Upon obtaining His mercy, a person can deliver suffering
humanity from material contamination. Because the six Goswamis were
such devotees, we offer our respectful obeisances unto them with the
mantra: vande rtipa-sanatanau raghu-yugau Sri-jiva-gopdlakau. The six
Goswamis were expert in scrutinizingly studying all the scriptures with
the aim to establish real religion in the world. They left many books to
guide us, the most famous of which is Sri Ripa Goswami’s Bhaktirasamrta-sindhu (The Nectar of Devotion), which gives the neophyte
devotee initial direction. The Goswamis always worked very hard, day
and night, and their business was simply writing books, chanting, and
dancing. Indeed, they were practically released from the bodily
necessities of eating, sleeping, mating, and defending themselves out of
fear. There was no question of mating at all, nor was there any question
of fearing or defending, for they were totally absorbed in Krsna. At most
they used to sleep one and a half hours daily, and they ate practically
nothing. Whenever they felt hungry, they would simply go to a householder’s home and beg one or two pieces of bread.

The mission of such saintly persons is but to make suffering humanity
happy by elevating everyone to spiritual consciousness. In the material
world, everyone is trying to exploit one another—one nation 1s trying to
exploit another nation, one society is trying to exploit another, one
businessman is trying to exploit another, etc. This is called the struggle
for existence, and out of it the people who are struggling have invented a
law called ‘‘Might is right,’’ but we can actually see that even the most
powerful must struggle, just as in the current world situation. There is a
great struggle going on between Russia, America, and China. Because of
such struggle, everyone is suffering. Indeed, the very struggle for existence means suffering. The pure devotees of Krsna, however, are interested not in exploiting others but in helping people become happy,
and therefore they are worshiped on all planets. Canakya Pandita even
said that a rich man and a learned man cannot be compared, for a rich
man may be honored in his own country or on his own planet, but a
learned man, a devotee of God, is honored wherever he goes.

Nor for a devotee is there a distinction between heaven and hell, because Krsna is with him in both places. Where there is Krsna, there is no
question of hell; every place is Vaikuntha. Haridaésa Thakura, for

 

 

 
296 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

instance, did not enter the Jagannatha temple at Puri, for he was born in
a Muhammadan family, and the Hindus opposed the Muhammadans’
entering the temple. Haridaésa Thakura did not let this disturb him,
however. He thought, ‘‘Oh, why should I go and disturb them? I shall
chant here.’’ Consequently Lord Caitanya, who is Lord Jagannatha Himself, came daily to see Haridasa. This is the power of a pure devotee: he
doesn’t have to go to Jagannatha; Jagannatha comes to him. Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu used to go see Haridasa Thakura daily when the
Lord was going to bathe in the sea. The Lord would enter Haridasa’s cottage and ask, ‘‘Hariddsa, what are you doing?’’ and Haridasa would reply,
‘Please come in, my Lord.’’ This then is the actual position of a devotee.
Therefore Krsna says that worship of His devotee is even more valuable
than worship of Himself. The devotee is actually able to deliver
Krsna, for he knows the science of Krsna consciousness, the science of
hearing Krsna’s words, eating Krsna prasdda, and enjoying Krsna. The
impersonalists and voidists may preach dry philosophical treatises on
aham brahmaésmi—‘‘I am spirit?’ —but ultimately who will be attracted?
What is the difference between someone who thinks, ‘‘I am a stone,”’
and someone who thinks, ‘‘I am void’’? Why should we become stone,
wood, or void? Our actual position should be in reciprocating loving
affairs with Krsna.

The spark of love for Krsna is struck by the spiritual master, the pure
devotee. As for myself, my spiritual master, His Divine Grace Om
Visnupada Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvat! Goswami Prabhupada, ordered me
to take up the responsibility of spreading Krsna consciousness in the
Western world. His Divine Grace had a great desire to preach Lord
Caitanya’s message in the West, and my success is both his grace and
pleasure. When I first met my spiritual master, I was a very young man in
India, a nationalist, engaged in a very responsible office. But although I
did not want to go, one of my friends, who is still living in Calcutta, forcibly took me to His Divine Grace. I was reluctant to see him because in
our home our father used to receive many sannydasis and I was not very
Satisfied with their dealings. I thought that Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Goswami Maharaja might be a similar man, and if he were, what business
would I have in seeing him? But my friend took me forcibly. ‘‘Why not
see him?’’ he asked. I finally relented and went with him, and I profited.

On my first visit, His Divine Grace said that it was necessary for educated boys like me to go to foreign countries and preach the gospel of
-Caitanya Mahdprabhu. I replied that India was a foreign-dominated
nation and that no one would hear our message. Actually at the time for
 
Reaching Life’s Perfection 297

eigners considered Indians very insignificant because in the face of so
many independent nations India was still dependent, being dominated by
Britain. At the time there was one Bengali poet who actually lamented
that even uncivilized nations were independent, whereas India was dependent on the British. His Divine Grace convinced me that dependence
and independence are simply temporary conditions, and he pointed out
that because we are concerned with the eternal benefit of humanity, we
should take up this challenge of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This meeting
with His Divine Grace, my Guru Maharaja, took place in 1922, half a
century ago.

I was officially initiated in 1933, just three years before the passing of
Guru Maharaja from this mortal world. At the last moment, just a
fortnight before his passing away, he wrote me a letter repeating his instructions. He specifically said that I should try to preach this gospel
among English-speaking people. After receiving this letter, I sometimes
dreamed that Guru Maharaja was calling me and that I was leaving home
and following him. I was dreaming in this way and thinking, “‘I have to
give up my home. My Guru Maharaja wants me to give up my home and
take sannyasa.’’ At the same time I thought, ‘This is horrible. How can I
leave my home? My wife? My children?’’ This is called maya. Actually I
did not want to give up my home life, but Guru Maharaja made me give it
up. Following his orders, I left my home, including a few children, but
now Guru Maharaja has given me many nice children all over the world.
Thus by serving Krsna no one becomes a loser, and this is an example
from my own practical experience.

When I left India alone in 1965, I feared that I would have a great deal
of trouble. The Indian government would not allow me to take any
money out of the country, so I came with only a few books and forty
rupees. I arrived in New York City in such a condition, but it was all by
the grace of Guru Maharaja and Krsna. Everything happens by the combined mercy of Krsna and the spiritual master. In the Caitanya-caritamrta
it is stated that the mercy of Krsna and guru are combined. This is the
secret of the success of this Krsna consciousness movement. Krsna is always within us, and consequently He knows everything about our purposes, and He gives us the opportunity to work as we decide. If we decide
to enjoy this material world, Krsna gives us the intelligence to become a
very shrewd businessman or a popular politician or a cunning man so
that we can earn money and enjoy ourselves. According to the standards
of material life, many people are becoming great. They begin as very poor
men and soon, by good fortune, become millionaires. We should not
298 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

think, however, that they are attaining such success by their own puny
endeavors. Without intelligence, no one can improve, and that intelligence is given by Krsna. In the Bhagavad-gita Krsna states that He is
seated in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul and that by His will a man can
remember, and by His will a man can forget. Krsna supplies forgetfulness
and remembrance according to the living entity’s desire. If we want to
forget Krsna and enjoy the material world, He will give us the necessary
intelligence so that we can forget Him for good.

Many people are thinking, ‘‘I can enjoy this material world very nicely.
Everyone is having such a good time. There is no reason I can’t enjoy
myself as much as they.”’ This idea is illusion because there is no real enjoyment in the material world. We may rise to a very high position like
President Kennedy. We may be very good-looking, very famous, very intelligent, and well educated, very wealthy and very powerful, and we may
have a very beautiful wife and children and hold the highest position in
the country—but at any moment we are subject to be shot down. This is
the nature of the material world: we have to face danger at every step.
There is no question of having pleasure without impediments. Even
when the pleasures are earned, they are earned after a great deal of struggle and sacrifice, and whatever pleasure may be acquired is temporary,
for in the material world there is no pleasure that can give us constant
and unending enjoyment. Only Krsna can give us that.

Therefore Krsna instructs in the Bhagavad-gita that it is the welfare of
every living entity to give up this nonsensical material activity and just
surrender unto Him. Unfortunately, in this age people are so attracted by
the glitter of material nature, to illusion, or maya, that they are not very
interested. Krsna even declares that if one surrenders unto Him, He will
give all protection from all sinful reactions, but still people are so attached that they cannot do it. People always fear that by surrendering to
Krsna they will lose something, just as I feared losing my family by going
to the Western world and preaching. But Krsna is so kind that if He takes
anything away, He will reward us a thousandfold.

The spiritual master is also kind in that he begs from door to door,
country to country, town to town: ‘‘My dear ladies and gentlemen, my
dear boys and girls, please take to Krsna consciousness.’’ In this way he
renders very confidential service to Krsna. Krsna is the Supreme Lord
who gives the orders, and the spiritual master executes those orders;
therefore the spiritual master is very dear to Krsna. Whether Krsna sends
him to heaven or to hell makes no difference to him. For the spiritual
master, a pure devotee, heaven and hell are both the same if there is no

sre inka anne Ab CHE Raed AERC cris ibn oar iger ley oe mtg A
Reaching Life’s Perfection 299

Krsna consciousness. In hell people are suffering in so many ways, and in
heaven they are enjoying their senses in so many ways, but a devotee of
the Lord can live any place where there is Krsna consciousness, and since
he brings this consciousness with him, he is always self-satisfied. If he is
sent to hell, he will be satisfied simply chanting Hare Krsna. In fact, he
does not believe in hell but in Krsna. Similarly, if he were put in heaven,
where there are so many opportunities for sense gratification, he would
also remain aloof, for his senses are satisfied by Krsna Himself. Thus for
the service of the Lord a devotee is prepared to go anywhere, and for this
reason he is very dear to Krsna.

Renounced impersonalist philosophers say that this world is false and
that the impersonal Brahman is truth. But if they are asked to go out into
society where material sense gratification predominates, they will refuse
for fear of being affected by those conditions. For a Krsna conscious person, however, there is no such difficulty. Because he is controlled and has
taken shelter of Krsna, he is not afraid of going anywhere.

Consequently, when devotees meet in a place where there is no Krsna
consciousness, there is no harm, for they take the opportunity to chant
Hare Krsna and infuse the place with Krsna consciousness. This opportunity should always be taken. It is not that one should close himself up
in aroom and chant alone. The great sage Narada is a spaceman who travels all over the universe. Although he can dwell in the most elevated
planets, he sometimes goes to hell and preaches there. That is the beauty
of a servant of God—he is always acting out of love for Krsna and His
parts and parcels. }

The underlying principle of devotional service is unalloyed love for
Krsna. Regardless of the position of a particular devotee —as friend, servant, parent, or lover of Krsna—his service is unconditional, for Krsna
consciousness is not dependent on any material condition. It is transcendental and has nothing to do with the modes of material nature. A devotee is not afraid to go anywhere, and because of this he sees all material
conditions as equal. In the world we may say that this is a good place to be
and that is a bad place, but, as pointed out before, the devotee is not subject to these mental concoctions. For him the basic principle of material
existence is bad, for material existence means forgetfulness of Krsna.

In the neutral stage of devotion one may give more importance to the
impersonal effulgence of the Lord and to the Supersoul within the heart,
but Krsna consciousness actually develops when one thinks, ‘‘Krsna is
my very intimate master of intimate relationships.’’ In the beginning, of
course, impersonal realization and realization of the Supersoul are part of

 
300 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Krsna consciousness. The partial realization of God in His impersonal
aspect or in His aspect as Supersoul enables one to develop veneration
for the Lord, but when one has an intimate relationship with Krsna as a
friend, master, son, or lover, then the veneration disappears.

This platform of personal relationship is certainly higher than the
impersonal platform or the platform of Supersoul, or Paramatma, realization. In the neutral conception, one simply realizes that he and the Absolute Truth are one in quality, or he realizes that he is part and parcel of
the Supreme. That is certainly knowledge, for when one develops a personal relationship with Krsna as servant, he begins to appreciate the
full opulence of the Supreme Lord. One who realizes that God is
full in six opulences actually begins rendering service. As soon as one becomes aware of the greatness of Krsna and understands Krsna’s
superiority, his service begins. The awareness of God’s greatness increases when transcendental service is rendered. A person who serves
the Lord in order to satisfy the senses of the Lord becomes satisfied because Krsna is the Supersoul, and the individual living entity is His part
and parcel. If He is satisfied, then the living entity is satisfied. If the
stomach is satisfied, then all the parts of the body are satisfied, for they
receive nourishment through the stomach. When one of my Godbrothers began to fan my Guru Mahéraja [spiritual master] on a very hot
day, Guru Maharaja asked, ‘‘Why are you fanning me all of a sudden?”’
The boy replied, ‘“Because if you are satisfied, we are all satisfied.’’ This
is the formula—we should not try to satisfy our senses separately, but
should try to satisfy Krsna’s senses. Then naturally we will become
satisfied.

A Krsna conscious person is always trying to give satisfaction to Krsna,
and this is the beginning of Krsna consciousness. Because in the impersonal conception there is no form of God, there is no opportunity to
satisfy His senses. However, one who sees Krsna as master can render
service. In the Bhagavad-gita Krsna is referred to as Hrsikesa, master of
the senses. When it is understood that the Absolute Truth is the master
of the senses, that our senses are products of His senses, and that they
should therefore be utilized for the satisfaction of His senses, Krsna consciousness, which is dormant within everyone, begins to awaken. Once
Caitanya Mahdprabhu asked, ‘‘What is the difference between the
neutral position in relation to Krsna and the relationship of master and
servant?’’ In both cases one can understand that Krsna is great, but in
the neutral position there 1s no inclination for service. Therefore the
master-servant relationship between Krsna and the living entity is more
Reaching Life’s Perfection . 301

elevated. Then when one attains friendship with Krsna, another transcendental quality is added. There is the conception that God is great and
that service must be rendered unto Him, but there is also an extra feeling: ‘‘Krsna is my friend. Therefore I must treat Him in such a way that
He will be happy.’’ With a friend we are not simply content with rendering service but in making him actually happy and satisfied. There is also
equality in such a relationship, for Krsna and the devotee relate on equal
terms. Thus devotees in this position actually forget Krsna’s superiority.
When Krsna’s boyfriends used to ride on Krsna’s shoulders playing
games, they did not think that they were greater than Him. There is no
question of sense gratification or self-glorification, for the relationship is
based on pure love. The devotee’s only desire is to give pleasure to
Krsna, and Krsna also takes His friends on His shoulders to derive
pleasure from them. Sometimes a person simply accepts the fact that his
friend will slap his face—but there is no question of inferiority in such an
action. When friendship and mutual pleasure are the basis of the relationship, there is no question of insult or inferiority.

The whole basis of Krsna consciousness and a relationship with Krsna
is the pleasure potency of Krsna Himself. Srimati Radharani, the damsels
of Vraja, and Krsna’s cowherd boyfriends are all expansions of Krsna’s
pleasure potency. We all have a tendency toward pleasure because the
source from which we emanate is fully potent in pleasure. Impersonalists
cannot think in these terms, for they deny the pleasure potency;
therefore the impersonalist philosophy is incomplete and inferior. Those
who are in Krsna consciousness recognize the pleasure potency in Krsna
and in all His paraphernalia— His friends, servants, father, mother, and
consort. All relationships with Krsna which aim at satisfying Krsna’s
senses are manifestations of Krsna’s pleasure potency.

As far as the individual soul is concerned, it is originally a part and
parcel of this pleasure potency, of the reservoir of pleasure Himself.
However, due to contact with material nature, the soul has forgotten its
actual position and has become trapped in the evolutionary process of
transmigration from one body to another. Thus one struggles hard for existence. Now we must extricate ourselves from the sufferings of the
struggle, from the countless transmigrations that force us to suffer the
miseries of birth, old age, disease, and death, and come to the point of
our eternal life in Krsna consciousness. That eternal life is possible. If
one tries his best in this human form of life, in his next life he will get a
Spiritual body. The spiritual body is already within the gross material
body, but it will develop only as soon as one becomes free from the
302 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

contamination of this material existence. That is the aim of human life
and the actual self-interest of all people. Self-interest is actually realizing,
‘*T am part and parcel of God. I have to return to the kingdom of God and
join with Him.’’ Just as we have a social life here, God has a social life in
the spiritual kingdom, and we can join Him there. It is not that after
finishing this body we become void. In the Bhagavad-gita [2.12] Krsna
told Arjuna, ““Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor
all these kings, nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.’’ Our existence is therefore eternal, and the changes of birth and death are simply
the changes of the temporary material bodies.

The actual process for achieving eternal life is not at all difficult. This
process of Krsna consciousness is based on knowledge received from
Krsna, the most perfect being. Knowledge received from others is defective because the conditioned soul is certain to commit mistakes, certain
to be illusioned, certain to cheat, and certain to have imperfect senses.
The knowledge received from Krsna, however, actually enables us to see
Krsna. Someone may challenge, ‘‘Can you show me God?”’ and our
answer is, “Yes. God can be seen at every moment.’’ Krsna says, raso
‘ham apsu kaunteya: ‘‘I am the taste of water.’’ We drink water every day,
and the taste of water is there, so if we think of this taste as Krsna, we will
have begun realizing God every day. In the Bhagavad-gita Krsna further
says, prabhdsmi Sasi-stiryayoh: ‘‘I am the light of the sun and the moon.”’
Every day we receive sunlight, and in the evening there is moonshine, so
if we think of the source of these emanations, we will ultimately become
God conscious. There are so many similar instances given in the
Bhagavad-gita, for Krsna is the beginning, middle, and end of all
manifestations. If we want to become God conscious and realize our own
essence, it is not very difficult. We only have to understand God in
truth—how He appears, how He disappears, and what His functions
are—then we can become eligible to enter into the kingdom of God.
After quitting this material body, a person who understands God, Krsna,
does not return again to earth to accept another material body. Where
does he go? Krsna says, mam eti: ‘He comes to Me.”’ That should be the
aim of any intelligent human being.
Appendixes
About the Author

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada appeared in
this world in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his spiritual master,
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Goswami, in Calcutta in 1922. Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta, the foremost scholar and devotee of his time, had
founded the Gaudiya Matha (a Vedic institute with sixty-four branches
throughout India). He liked this educated young man and convinced him
to dedicate his life to teaching Vedic knowledge. Srila Prabhupada became his student, and eleven years later (1933) at Allahabad he became
his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura
requested Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge through the
English language. In the years that followed, Srila Prabhupada wrote a
commentary on the Bhagavad-gita, the most important Vedic text, and he
assisted the Gaudiya Matha in its work. In 1944 he singlehandedly started
an English fortnightly magazine called Back to Godhead. He edited and
typed the manuscripts, checked the galley proofs, and even distributed
the copies for free and struggled to maintain the publication.

Recognizing Srila Prabhupada’s philosophical learning and devotion,
the Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with the title
‘‘Bhaktivedanta.’’ In 1950, at age fifty-four, Srila Prabhupada retired
from family life. Four years later he adopted the vdanaprastha (retired)
order to devote more time to his studies and writing, and soon he traveled to the holy city of Vrndavana. There he lived in a small room in the
historic Radha-Damodara temple and engaged in several years of deep
study and writing. In 1959 he accepted the renounced order of life (sannyasa). At Radha-Damodara, Srila Prabhupadada wrote Easy Journey to
Other Planets and started his life’s masterpiece—a multivolume translation of and commentary on the eighteen-thousand-verse SrimadBhdgavatam, the cream of the Vedic literatures.

After publishing three volumes of the Bhdgavatam, Srila Prabhupada
came to the United States in 1965 to fulfill the mission of his spiritual
master. After that time, His Divine Grace wrote some eighty volumes of
authoritative translations, commentaries, and summary studies of the
philosophical and religious classics of India. When he first arrived by
freighter in New York City, Srila Prabhupada was practically penniless.
But after nearly a year of great difficulty, he founded the International
Society for Krishna Consciousness in July of 1966. Before his muchlamented passing on November 14, 1977, he guided the Society and saw

305
306 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

it grow to a worldwide confederation of more than one hundred ashrams,
schools, temples, institutes, and farm communities.

In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vrndavana, an experimental
Vedic community in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by the success of
New Vrndavana (now a thriving farm community of more than one thousand acres), his students have since founded several similar communities
in the United States and abroad.

In 1975 Srila Prabhupdda’s magnificent Krsna-Balarama Temple and
International Guesthouse opened in Vrndavana, India. In 1978 a fouracre cultural complex (including a temple, modern theater, guesthouse,
and vegetarian restaurant) opened at Juhu Beach, in Bombay. Perhaps
Srila Prabhupadda’s most ambitious project is a planned city of fifty thousand residents in Mayapur, West Bengal. Sridhama Mayapur will stand as
a model for the whole world—a microcosm of Vedic life as it was five
thousand years ago.

In addition, Srila Prabhupada gave the West the Vedic system of primary and secondary education. The gurukula (‘‘the school of the spiritual
master’’) started only in 1972, but already it has hundreds of students
and many branches around the world.

Srila Prabhupadda’s most significant contribution, of course, is his
books. The academic community respects them for their authoritativeness, depth, and clarity, and has made them standard textbooks in
numerous college courses. In addition, translations of Srila Prabhupada’s
books now appear in twenty-five languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust, established in 1972 primarily to publish the works of His Divine
Grace, has thus become the world’s largest publisher of books in the field
of Indian religion and philosophy. A recent project has been the publishing of a seventeen-volume translation and commentary—which Srila
Prabhupada completed in only eighteen months—on the Bengali
religious classic Sri Caitanya-caritamrta. In just twelve years, in spite of
his advanced age, Srila Prabhupada circled the globe fourteen times on
lecture tours that took him to six continents. In spite of such a vigorous
schedule, Srila Prabhupada continued to write prolifically. His writings
are a library of Vedic philosophy, religion, and culture.

°
leavungareacantissrcuiinaecis: SRémibbatie diane cena Noa oo a

 

3
“4
q
t
4
4
|
i
Glossary

Words in SMALL CAPITALS are defined elsewhere in the Glossary.

A

adhibhautika—miseries caused by conflict with other living entities.

adhidaivika—miseries caused by the forces of nature.

adhyatmika—miseries caused by one’s own mind and body.

Advaita Acarya—an incarnation of the Lord who appeared as a principal
associate of another incarnation, Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU.

Age of Kali—See KALI-YUGA.

Akriira—an uncle of Lord KRSNA.

Anandagiri—a prominent follower of SANKARACARYA.

apavarga—See MUKTI.

Arjuna—one of the five PANDAVA brothers; Lord KRSNA became his
chariot driver during the battle of KURUKSETRA and spoke to him
the BHAGAVAD.-GITA.

ashrams—the four Vedic developmental divisions of the human lifecycle which are meant to elevate one to spiritual perfection; these
begin with brahmacarya (celibacy and study), proceed to grhastha
(married life), and va@naprastha (retirement), and culminate in sannyasa (complete renunciation of family life and material obligations). See also VARNASRAMA-DHARMA.

astanga-yoga—the eight-step process of meditation, beginning with sitting postures and breath-control, and culminating with realization
of the Lord’s form within one’s heart.

ASvatthama—the nefarious son of the great military teacher DRONA who
murdered the children of the PANDAVA brothers.

atma—See JIVA.

avatara—a ‘‘descent,’’ or appearance on earth of the Supreme Lord or
His representative.

B

Badarayana—See VYASADEVA.

Baladeva—See JAGANNATHA, BALADEVA, AND SUBHADRA.

Bhagavad-gita—the paramount scripture of the Vedic tradition, embodying the teachings of Lord KRSNA to His devotee ARJUNA and
expounding devotion to the Supreme Lord as both the principal
means and the ultimate end of spiritual perfection.

307
308 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Bhagavan—the Supreme Lord, who is the ultimate possessor of all
_ varieties of opulences.

bhakta—a devotee of the Supreme Lord.

bhakti (bhakti-yoga) —the practice of devotional service to the Supreme
Lord.

Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu—RUPA GOSWAMI’s definitive explanation of
devotional service to the Supreme Lord, beginning with the most
elementary practices and ending with the ultimate perfection of
personal relationships with the Lord.

Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati— (1874-1936) the ‘‘grandfather’’ of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness; the spiritual
master of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.

Bhaktivedanta—a title meaning °‘‘one who has realized that devotional
service to the Supreme Lord is the end of all knowledge.”’

Bhaktivinoda Thakura— (1838-1915) the ‘‘great-grandfather’’ of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness; the spiritual
master of Srila BHAKTISIDDHANTA SARASVATI.

Bharata—a name of ARJUNA meaning ‘“‘descendant of Bharata.’’

Bharata Maharaja—a great devotee of the Lord who because of neglect
of spiritual duties took birth as a deer; in his following birth, as a
human, he attained perfection.

Bharata-varsa—the traditional, scriptural name for India.

Bhisma—the most powerful and oldest warrior in the Battle of KURUKSETRA; he is recognized as one of the chief authorities on devotional service to the Lord.

Brahma—the first created living being in the universe; he creates the
multiplicity of life-forms, planets, and living conditions under the
supervision of the Supreme Lord.

brahmacarli, brahmacarya—See ASHRAMS.

brahmajyoti—the bodily effulgence of the Supreme Lord.

Brahman—the impersonal, all-pervasive aspect of the Supreme Lord.

brahmana—See VARNAS.

Brahma-samhita—a nutshell description of the glories of the Lord, including prayers to the Lord by BRAHMA.

Brhan-naradiya Purana—See PURANAS.

Buddha—a disguised incarnation of the Supreme Lord who preached
atheism in order to divert the people of that time from misusing the
ritualistic sacrifices of the VEDAS as a license for animal slaughter.
Glossary 309

C

Caitanya-caritamrta—Krsnadasa Kaviradja Goswami’s presentation of
the life and philosophy of Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu—the incarnation of the Supreme Lord disguised
as His own devotee, who descended to teach love of God through
the process of congregational chanting of the holy names of the
Lord.

caitya-guru—the Supreme Lord, advising an advanced devotee from
within the heart. |

Cantira—a powerful wrestler and a servant of the demonic KAMSA; Lord
KRSNA as a young boy killed him.

Carvaka—an atheistic philosopher whose motto was ‘‘Beg, borrow, or
steal, but somehow or other enjoy material life.’’

Chandogya Upanisad—See UPANISADS.

D

daridra-narayana—the misconception that since the Supreme Lord is in
everyone’s heart, therefore any man can be accepted as God, and
thus worship of the poor is the same as worship of the Lord.

Devaki—the wife of VASUDEVA and mother of Lord KRSNA.

Devi—See DURGA.

dharma—the eternal function of the living entity.

Dhrtarastra—the father who collaborated with his sons to cheat the PANDAVA brothers of their kingdom and fight against them in the Battle
of KURUKSETRA.

Drona—the military teacher of the PANDAVA brothers who was obliged
to fight against them in the Battle of KURUKSETRA.

Durga—the personified material energy of the Lord, and the wife of the
demigod SIVA.

Duryodhana—the son of DHRTARASTRA who led the fight against the
PANDAVA brothers in the Battle of KURUKSETRA.

G

Gadadhara Pandita—a principal associate of Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU.

GaneSa—the demigod in charge of material wealth.

Ganges (Ganga) —India’s most sacred river.

Gargamuni—the family priest of the Yadu dynasty, the dynasty Lord
KRSNA chose to incarnate in.
310 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Gaudiya Matha (Gaudiya Mission) —the Krsna consciousness association of temples and preaching institutions established by Srila
BHAKTISIDDHANTA SARASVATI in the early part of the twentieth
century.

Gauranga—See CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU.

Goloka—the supreme planet in the spiritual world, VAIKUNTHA.

Gopala Bhatta Goswami—one of the six Vaisnava spiritual masters who
directly followed Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU and systematically
presented His teachings.

gopis—the cowherd girl friends of Lord KRSNA in VRNDAVANA, who are
His most surrendered and confidential devotees.

goswami—See SWAMI.

Govinda—a name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead meaning
““Qne WH gives Qleasure ta the land the caws, and the segses,””

grhastha—See ASHRAMS.

guru—a spiritual master who is perfectly God-realized and who only
speaks and acts in accordance with the scriptures.

guru-kula—a school of Vedic learning; boys begin at the age of five and
live as celibate students, guided by a spiritual master.

hf

Hare (Hara) —See RADHA.

Hari—a name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead meaning ‘‘He
who removes all obstacles to spiritual progress.”’

Haridasa Thakura—a great devotee of Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU
famous for chanting three hundred thousand names of God every
day.

hari-kirtana—See KIRTANA.

Hari-vamsa—a supplement to the MAHABHARATA.

I
Indra—the king of the heavenly planets and chief of the administrative
- demigods.
ISopanisad —See UPANISADS.

J

Jagad-guru—‘‘spiritual master of the universe.”’

Jagannatha, Baladeva, and Subhadra—the Deity of Lord KRSNA as
Jagannatha (‘‘Lord of the Universe’’), together with His brother,
Baladeva, and sister, Subhadra.
Glossary 311

Jagannatha Puri (Jagannatha-dhama) —a city on the coast of Orissa, a
province in eastern India; the holy city of the temple and Deity of
Lord JAGANNATHA.

Jayadratha—a chief enemy of the PANDAVAS in the battle of KURUKSETRA.

jiva—the individual living entity, who is an eternal minute part of the
Supreme Lord.

Jiva Goswami—one of the six Vaisnava spiritual masters who directly
followed Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU and systematically presented His teachings.

jnani—one who tries to reach the Supreme Absolute by cultivation of
empirical, speculative knowledge.

K

Kali—See DURGA.

Kali-yuga—the current Vedic historical age (fourth and last in a cycle of
four progressively degenerating ages) characterized by a
progressive decline in spiritual knowledge and, consequently, the
degeneration of human civilization.

kalpa-taru—a ‘‘desire tree,’’ which grows in the spiritual world and can
immediately yield any fruit desirable.

kama—material desire; lust.

Kamsa—a demonic king who, after instigating many fruitless attempts to
kill KRSNA, was himself killed by Krsna.

karma—activity in the material world, which always entangles one in
some reaction, whether good or bad.

karma-kanda—rituals recommended in the VEDAS for those interested
in material benefits.

karmi—a person who is trying to enjoy the results of his material
activities. |

Karna—a stepbrother of the PANDAVAS who fought against them in the
Battle of KURUKSETRA.

Katha Upanisad—See UPANISADS.

KeSava Kasmiri—a famous scholar defeated in a poetry competition by
Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU.

kirtana—singing or speaking in glorification of the Supreme Lord. See
also SANKIRTANA.

Krpa—a great warrior who fought against the PANDAVA brothers in the
battle ef KURUKSETRA.

Krsna—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appearing in His original,

 
312 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

two-armed form, which is the origin of all of the Lord’s other forms
and incarnations.

Krsnaloka—See GOLOKA.

krsna-prasada—See PRASADA.

krsna-prema—See PREMA.

ksatriya—See VARNAS.

Kunti—the mother of the PANDAVAS, and an aunt of Lord KRSNA. :

Kuruksetra—an ancient pilgrimage site near New Delhi where the Battle
of Kuruksetra was fought and the BHAGAVAD-GITA was spoken. See
also DHRTARASTRA and PANDAVAS.

L

Laksmi—the goddess of fortune and the eternal consort of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead NARAYANA.

M

Madhvacarya—a thirteenth-century Vaisnava spiritual master who
preached the theistic philosophy of “‘pure dualism.” which main
tains that the Lord and the living entities are always distinct from
one another.

Mahabharata—VYASADEVA’s epic history of ancient India, within which
he included the BHAGAVAD.-GITA.

mahajanas—the chief authorities on the process of devotional service to
the Lord.

maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance:
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

Maharaja—a title. See specific names.

mahatma—a “‘great soul’’; devotee of God.

Mandukya Upanisad—See UPANISADS.

mantra—a syllable, word, or verse with special spiritual potency chanted
Or meditated upon to invoke spiritual understanding and realization.

Manu-samhita—the ancient Vedic lawbook for human society.

Martya-loka—‘‘the world of death’’; the planet earth.

Marut (Vayu) —the demigod in charge of the wind.

maya—the material energy; the illusory energy of the Lord that deludes
the living entity into forgetfulness of his real, spiritual nature.

Mayavada—the monistic philosophy that there is no difference between
God and the living entities. See also SANKARACARYA.
Glossary 313

mleccha—one who does not follow Vedic culture.

mrdanga—a clay drum used in musical glorification of the Lord.
mukti—liberation from the cycle of repeated birth and death.
Mundaka Upanisad—See UPANISADS.

N

Nanda Maharaja—the king of VRAJA and the foster-father of Lord
KRSNA.

Narada-pafcaratra— Narada Muni’s book containing instructions for
practicing devotional service to the Lord.

Narayana—a name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead meaning
‘fone who is the source and the goal of all living beings.”’

Navadvipa—a city in the Nadia province of West Bengal which is the
birthplace of Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU.

The Nectar of Devotion—a summary study by His Divine Grace A. C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada of the book BHAKTI-RASAMRTASINDHU by RUPA GOSWAMI.

New Vrndavana—the first farm-community, located in West Virginia, of
the International Society for Krishna Consciousness.

Nimai Pandita—the name of Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU during His
pastimes as a young scholar.

Nityananda Prabhu—an incarnation of the Lord who appeared as the
chief associate of another incarnation, Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU.

O

omkara—the sacred sound om, which is the beginning of many Vedic
mantras, and which represents the Supreme Lord.

P

Padma Purana—See PURANAS.

Pandavas—YUDHISTHIRA, Bhima, ARJUNA, Nakula, and Sahadeva: the
five warrior-brothers who were intimate friends of Lord KRSNA
and who fought to regain their kingdom from the sons of
DHRTARASTRA in the Battle of KURUKSETRA.

Para-brahman—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is superior
to His impersonal aspect of BRAHMAN.

Paramatma—the form of the Supreme Lord that dwells in the heart of
and accompanies every living entity as the living entity transmigrates from body to body in the material world.
314 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

ParaSara Muni—the father of VYASADEVA and original narrator of
several of the PURANAS.

Pariksit Maharaja—a great Vedic king and devotee of the Lord who
heard SRIMAD-BHAGAVATAM from SUKADEVA GOSWAMI and thus

' attained perfection.

Patanjali—the author of the original yoga system.

Prahlada Maharaja—a devotee of the Lord who was persecuted by his
demonic father but protected and saved by the Lord.

PrakasSananda Sarasvati—an impersonalist SANNYASI who, after being
defeated in scriptural argument by Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU,
became a disciple along with his forty thousand followers.

prakrti—the predominated energies of the Supreme Lord, of which
there are two: the living entities, and material nature, or dead matter. See also PURUSA.

pranava—See OMKARA.

prasada—food which is sanctified by being first offered to the Lord for
His enjoyment.

Prayaga—a pilgrimage site near Allahabad, where the two holy rivers the
GANGES and Yamuna flow together.

prema—love of God that is free from any selfish motive.

Puranas—the eighteen texts expounding the teachings of the VEDAS
through historical and allegorical narrations.

purusa—the Supreme Lord as the supreme predominator of PRAKRTI.

Putana—a demonic witch who wanted to kill Lord KRSNA during His
childhood pastimes, but who was killed by the Lord.

Puri—See JAGANNATHA PURI.

R

Radha (Radharani) —Lord KRSNA’s most intimate eternal consort, who
is the personification of His spiritual pleasure potency.

Raghunatha Bhatta Goswami and Raghunatha dasa Goswami—two of
the six Vaisnava spiritual masters who directly followed Sri
CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU and systematically presented His teachings.

rajas—the material mode of passion, characterized by materialistic endeavor and desire for sense gratification.

Rama—a name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead meaning ‘“‘the
source of all pleasure.”’

Ramacandra—an incarnation of the Lord who demonstrated the
behavior of a ‘perfect king.
Glossary 315

Ramananda Raya—a confidential associate of Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU.

Ramanujacarya—an eleventh-century Vaisnava spiritual master who
began the theistic attack against SANKARACARYA’s philosophy of
monism.

rasa—the specific ‘‘taste’’ of a specific personal relationship with the
Supreme Lord.

Ratha-yatra—the annual festival of Lord JAGANNATHA, in which the
Deity is carried on huge carts in a parade.

Rg Veda—one of the four original VEDAS, containing hymns to different
demigods.

Rudra—See SIVA.

Rupa Goswami—the chief of the six Vaisnava spiritual masters who
directly followed Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU and systematically
presented His teachings.

S

Sabda-brahma—the VEDAS, which are considered purely spiritual sound
vibration.

sac-cid-ananda—perfect spiritual existence, which is eternal (saz), fully
knowledgeable (cit), and completely happy (dnanda).

Salya—an uncle of the PANDAVA brothers who fought against them in
the battle of KURUKSETRA.

samadhi—fixed meditation on the personal form of the Lord.

Sama Veda—one of the four original VEDAS, containing sacrificial
prayers and their melodic and metrical settings.

Sanatana Goswami—one of the six Vaisnava spiritual masters who
directly followed Sri CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU and systemically presented His teachings.

Sankaracarya—the famous and influential ninth-century teacher of
monism, a philosophy which maintains that there is no distinction
between God and the living entity.

Sankhya—the branch of philosophy which deals with analysis of the elements of the material world.

sankirtana—congregational chanting of the holy names of God.

sannyasa—See ASHRAMS.

Sariraka-bhasya—the famous commentary on VEDANTA-SUTRA by
SANKARACARYA, in which he presents his philosophy of monism.

Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya—a great scholar who was philosophically
316 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

defeated by Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU and who then surrendered to the Lord as a disciple.

Sastras—authoritative scriptures. See also VEDIC LITERATURE.

Satya-yuga—a Vedic historical age (first and best in a cycle of four
progressively degenerating ages) characterized by a highly spiritually advanced human civilization. See also KALI-YUGA.

Siksastaka—eight instructive prayers written by Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU.

Sindhu—the river forming the western boundary of India.

Siva—the demigod who supervises the material quality of ignorance and
the final destruction of the material cosmos.

Sloka—a unit of Sanskrit verse. .

smrti—literature supplementary to the four VEDAS, such as the
PURANAS, BHAGAVAD-GITA, and MAHABHARATA.

Sraddha—the faith necessary to hear submissively from a proper authority.

Sri, Srila, Srimati, Sripada—titles. See specific names following title.

Sri-ksetra—See JAGANNATHA PURI.

Srimad-Bhagavatam (Bhagavata Purana) —VYASADEVA’s ‘‘spotless
PURANA, which deals exclusively with pure devotional service to
the Supreme Lord.

Srinivasa Acarya—a great Vaisnava spiritual master and a direct
follower of RUPA, SANATANA, and JIVA GOSWAMIS.

Srivasa Thakura—a principal associate of Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU.

Sruti—the original four VEDAS.

Subhadra—See JAGANNATHA, BALADEVA, AND SUBHADRA.

Siidra—See VARNAS.

Sukadeva Goswami—the sage who spoke SRIMAD-BHAGAVATAM to
King PARIKSIT just prior to the king’s death.

Svetasvatara Upanisad—See UPANISADS.

swami—one who has by spiritual strength become the master of his
senses.

T

tamas—the material mode of ignorance, characterized by ignorance,
lethargy, and madness.

tapasya—austerity; material inconvenience accepted in the pursuit of
Spiritual realization.
Glossary 317

Teachings of Lord Caitanya—a summary study by His Divine Grace
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada of the book CAITANYACARITAMRTA.

Thakura Bhaktivinoda—See BHAKTIVINODA THAKURA.

U

Upanisads—the philosophical division of the VEDAS, meant for bringing
the student closer to understanding the personal nature of the Absolute Truth.

V

Vaikuntha—the eternal, spiritual world beyond the material cosmos.

Vaisnava—a devotee of KRSNA,or of any other form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

vaiSya—See VARNAS.

Valmiki Muni—the author of the original Raémdyana, the epic of Lord
RAMACANDRA’S pastimes. ’

vanaprastha—See ASHRAMS.

varnas—the four social-occupational divisions of Vedic society:
brahmanas (priests, teachers, and intellectuals), ksatriyas (military
men and public administrators), vaisyas (farmers and businessmen), and Stidras (laborers and craftsmen). See also VARNASRAMADHARMA.

varna-sankara—children who are the result of sex not in accordance
with Vedic religious principles.

varnaSrama-dharma—the ancient Vedic system of arranging society
into four social-occupational divisions (VARNAS) and four spiritual
divisions (ASHRAMS) to promote social, economic, and political
well-being and the spiritual advancement of all members of society.

Varuna—the demigod in charge of water.

Vasudeva—the father of Lord KRSNA.

Vasudeva—a name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the
Supreme Lord of all spiritual and material worlds.

Vedanta-sitra (Vedanta) —VYASADEVA’s summary of the theistic philosophy of the VEDIC LITERATURE, written in the form of concise
codes.

Vedas—the four scriptures, RG, Yajur, SAMA, and Atharva, and in a
broader sense also including the UPANISADS and VEDANTA-SUTRA.

Vedic literature—the four VEDAS, the UPANISADS, VEDANTA-SUTRA,
318 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

PURANAS, MAHABHARATA, other histories and supplements, and
also more recent works written in pursuance of the Vedic conclusion.

Vikarna—a warrior who fought against the PANDAVAS in the battle of
KURUKSETRA.

Visnu—a name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the creator
and maintainer of the material universes.

Visnu Purana—See PURANAS.

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura—a Vaisnava spiritual master and commentator on SRIMAD-BHAGAVATAM in the disciplic succession from
Lord CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU.

Viveka-cudamani—the best-known work of SANKARACARYA, in which
he presents his philosophy of monism.

Vraja (Vrajabhiimi) —See VRNDAVANA.

Vrndavana—Lord KRSNA’s most intimate and personal abode, where He
engages in loving pastimes with His devotees.

Vyasadeva—the original compiler of the VEDAS and PURANAS, and
author of VEDANTA-SUTRA and MAHABHARATA.

Vyasa-puja—the appearance day of the spiritual master, on which he is
honored as the representative of VYASADEVA and the direct representative of the Supreme Lord.

Y

Yamaraja—the demigod in charge of punishing the sinful after death,
and who is also recognized as one of the chief authorities on devotional service to Lord KRSNA.

Yasoda—the foster-mother of Lord KRSNA, and the wife of NANDA
MAHARAJA.

yavana—a barbarian.

yoga—various processes of spiritual realization, all ultimately meant for
attaining the Supreme.

yogi—one who is striving in one of the YOGA processes.

Yudhisthira—the eldest of the PANDAVA brothers; Lord KRSNA
established him as king after the Battle of KURUKSETRA.
Guide to Sanskrit Pronunciation

Throughout the centuries, the Sanskrit language has been written in a
variety of alphabets. The mode of writing most widely used throughout
India, however, is called devandgari, which literally means ‘‘the city writing of the devas, or gods.’’ The devandgarialphabet consists of forty-eight
characters, including thirteen vowels and thirty-five consonants. The ancient Sanskrit grammarians arranged the alphabet according to concise
linguistic principles, and this arrangement has been accepted by all
Western scholars. The system of transliteration used in this book conforms to a system that scholars in the last fifty years have almost universally accepted to indicate the pronunciation of each Sanskrit sound.

The short vowel a is pronounced like the u in but; long 4 like the a in
far; and short i like the iin pin. Long 1is pronounced as in pique, short u

as in pull, and long was in rule. The vowel r is pronounced like the ri in

rim. The vowel e is pronounced as in they; ai as in aisle; 0 as in go; and
au as in how. The anusvara (tn), which is a pure nasal, is pronounced like
the n in the French word bon, and visarga (h), which is a strong aspirate,
is pronounced as a final h sound. Thus ah is pronounced like aha, and ih
like ihi.

The guttural consonants—k, kh, g, gh, and n—are pronounced from
the throat in much the same manner as in English. K is pronounced as in
kite, kh as in Eckhart, g as in give, gh as in dig hard, and n as in sing.
The palatal consonants—c, ch, j, jh, and i—are pronounced from the
palate with the middle of the tongue. C is pronounced as in chair, ch as in
staunch heart, j as in joy, jh as in hedgehog, and fi as in canyon. The
cerebral consonants—t, th, d, dh, and n—are pronounced with the tip of
the tongue turned up and drawn back against the dome of the palate. T is
pronounced as in tub, th as in light heart, d as in dove, dh as in red-hot,
and n as in nut.- The dental consonants—t, th, d, dh, and n—are pronounced in the same manner as the cerebrals but with the forepart of the
tongue against the teeth. The labial consonants—p, ph, b, bh, and m—
are pronounced with the lips. P is pronounced as in pine, ph as in uphill,
bas in bird, bh as in rub hard, and m as in mother. The semivowels—y, r,
], and v—are pronounced as in yes, run, light, and vine respectively. The
sibilants—Ss, s, and s—are pronounced, respectively, as in the German
word sprechen and the English words shine and sun. The letter h is pronounced as in home. .

319
Index

A

Abhay Charan Das, 80
See also: Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
Abhigacchet defined, 265
Abhyutthanam adharmasya
verse quoted, 149
Abode of Krsna
as highest abode, 86
See also: Liberation; Spiritual world
Abortion, 15
Absolute Truth
as beautiful, 36-38
features of, three described, 114
knowing about, means knowing all, 226
Mahatma Gandhi searched for, 36
opulences of, six listed, 36
questioning about, Vyasadeva recommends,
45
as Supreme Personality of Godhead
ultimately, 91
See also: Krsna; Supreme Lord
* Acaryam mam vijaniyan
verse quoted, 71
Acaryas
defined, 195
See also: Spiritual master; names of individual @caryas
Acintya-sakti
defined, 215
See also: Mystic power
Adhibhautika defined & example given, 55
Adhidaivika defined & example given, 55
Adhoksaja defined, 217
Adhuneha maha-bhaga
verse quoted, 244, 248
Adhyatmika defined & example given, 55
Advaita, 134
Advesta sarva-bhutanam
quoted, 257
Ages, four
religious processes in, 141-142
See also: individual names of Ages
Aging man & reborn man, analogy of, 25
Ahaituky apratihata
quoted, 12, 180

321

Aham brahmasmi
quoted, 237-238, 275, 296
Aham sarvasya prabhavo
quoted, 217
Aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
quoted, 180
verse quoted, 58, 65
Ahankara itiyam me
verse quoted, 76, 218
Aikantiki harer bhaktir
verse quoted, 99, 203
Air carrying fragrance, analogy of, 28
Aisvaryasya Samagrasya
verse quoted, 19
Ajndanadefined, 54
Ajo nityah sasvato ‘yam purano
verse quoted, 26, 237
Akrira, 140
Alcohol use. See: Intoxication; Regulative
principles
Alexander the Great, 199
America, United States of
as God’s land, 166-167, 187
motto of, 167, 188
American Revolution, 185-187
Amiudha, qualities of, 7
Anadir adir govindah
verse quoted, 79
Ananda-cinmaya-rasa
quoted, 85
Ananda defined, 143
Anandagiri’s vydkhyd, cited on Vedanta, 97, 99
Anandambudhi-vardhanam
quoted, 142
Anandambudhi-vardhanam prati-padam
ptirnamrtadsvadanam
verse quoted, 149
Anarpita-carim cirat karunayavatirnah kalau
verse quoted, 150
Anasaktasya visayan
verse quoted, 77
Anavrttih sabdat
quoted, 95, 97, 101
Anchor chains & material attachments, analogy
of, 6
Andhra Pradesh, 182, 183
322 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Andhra Pradesh Relief Fund Committee,
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupdada’s correspondence with, 182-184

Animal at slaughterhouse eating grass, analogy
of, 143-144

Animal killing

for animals, 117
by ‘‘Christians,’’ 120, 122, 123-124
as criminal, 185
forbidden in Krsna consciousness, 123
vs. murder, 115-116
necessary rarely, 123
by uncivilized men, 13
Animal life
See also: Animals
consciousness lower in, 124-125
vs. human life, 173-177, 252
varieties of, 176
Animal propensities, 168
four, discussed, 24
four, listed, 42-43, 77
Animals
See also: Animal life
birth as, 4, 29, 42, 125, 137
care for, 241
**Christians’’ kill, 120, 122, 123-124
death forgotten by, 41, 43
economic necessities for, 3
economic problems absent for, 275-276
food for, Lord provides, 12, 275-276
hog’s life, humans not meant for, 238
vs. human beings, 41, 42, 156, 167-168
& human beings, similarities in, 32-33, 124
illusion in, 41, 43, 143-144, 163
intelligence low in, 143-144
killing af. See: Animal killing,
life for, right of, 185
love for, 181
soul also in, 123-125
soul in, proof for, 32-33
Supersoul also in, 129

Animals & humans, soul in, analogy of, 124

Afijana, 136

Antavanta ime deha

quoted, 212
Antavat tu phalam tesam
verse quoted, 108
Apapa-viddha, Lord as, 116
Apareyam itas tvanyam
quoted, 218

Apartment disturbance & contraception,
analogy of, 50
Apavarga defined, 140
Api cet suduracaro
verse quoted, 258
Aradhyo bhagavan krsnas tad-dhama vrndavanam
quoted, 155-156
Arcana, 16-17, 282
Argument, proper & improper, 202-203
Arjuna, 56, 302
charioteer of, Krsna known as, 18
compared to calf, 85
illusion exemplified by, 282
& Krsna in Bhagavad-gita, 82
as Partha, 18
of royal family, but saintly, 66
spiritual master of, Krsna as, 58, 95
surrender of, 58, 130, 265-266
Ashram & varna system. See: Varnasrama
system
Ashrams defined, 105
Asoka, Emperor, 106
Ass carrying heavy load, analogy of, 178
Association with devotees of the Lord
faith from, 34-35
Krsna consciousness awakened by, 11
Astaka defined, 143
Astanga-yoga, 152
Astrologers at Lord’s appearance, 133
Asuras compared to owls, 89
ASvatthama, 87
Athato brahma-jijfiasa
quoted, 41, 156, 264
Atheism, 277, 284
argument against, 24
Mavanada ghilasanay ag, LQG
prominent preachers of, 108
as Sinners’ excuse, 24, 250
vs. theism, 108
See also: Supreme Lord, denial of
Atma
defined, 75, 129
See also: Soul
Atma-tattva defined, 200
Atmavit-sammata defined, 40
Atonement, 251
Attachment, material
compared to anchor chains, 6
compared to banyan tree, 6
types of, five listed, 6
7

Index

Attachment, material
See also: Desires, material; Illusion; Lust
Austerities
for brahmacaris, of sex-life restriction, 68-69
chanting as aid to, 101
of disciples of Srila Prabhupada, 62
human life meant for, 62, 154
rejected by bogus spiritual masters, 62
Author (of this book). See: Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada
Authorities, spiritual. See: Spiritual master
Avatara defined, 135
Avataras. See: Supreme Lord, incarnations of;
names of individual avataras
Avicyuto ’rthah kavibhir nirtpito
verse quoted, 267
Avidya defined, 100
Avidyaya mrtyum tirtva
verse quoted, 99
Avyaktad vyaktayah sarvah
verse quoted, 225
Avyayam defined, 132, 142

B

Back to Godhead magazine, 151
beginning of, by Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada, 16
benefit from, 8
as propaganda for reality, 43
Badarayana, 40
See also: Vyasadeva
Bahtnam janmanam ante
verse quoted, 100, 207, 256
Banyan tree, analogy of, 6, 8
Beauty
of Americans, 20
false, of material body, 37-38
of Krsna described, 175
Lord has all, 19, 20
Truth, Absolute, has all, 36, 38
Beings. See: Living entities
Belief in God
vs. atheism, 108
conviction of, argument for, 24
lack of. See: Atheism
as scientific, 25, 27, 32-34
Benares, 151

323

Berkeley, festival at, 103
Bhagavad-gita
See also: Bhagavad-gita As It Is; Bhagavadgita cited; Bhagavad-gita, quotations
from
age of, 196-197
as authority for Krsna consciousness movement, 64
as authorized, 99
author of, 56
bogus commentaries given on, 84, 88
cited on chanting (by Dr. Staal), 93, 94
compared to cow, 99
compared to milk, 85
contradictory appearance of, 96
as famous, 20 |
government’s duty to refer to, 5
hearing of, 83
India’s culture in, 105
interpretations of, as bogus, 56
Krsna & Arjuna in, 82
Krsna explains Himself in, 23
as Krsna identically, 83
Krsna “‘milks,’’ 84
Krsna’s fame seen by fame of, 20
Krsna’s knowledge evidenced by, 20
love of God taught by, 11-12
in Mahabharata, 82, 83, 87
by Narayana, 84
prayer to, 82
by Vydsadeva, 72
worship of, Sankaracarya orders, 84
yoga described in, 129-131
Bhagavaa-gita As It Is
as best-selling, 20
recommended in peace formula, 193
Bhagavad-gita cited
See also: Bhagavad-gita, quotations from
on chanting about Krsna, 98
on demonic nature, 109
On incarnation’s two missions, 133134
on Krsna consciousness as inexhaustible
& indestructible, 142
on Krsna consciousness as rdja-vidya,
etc., 132
on Krsna not known by midhas, fools,
138
on Krsna’s energies, greatness of, 135
on liberation by knowing Krsna, 137
324

Bhagavaa-gita cited (continued)

on Lord & living entities as one
qualitatively only, 277

on Lord approached by four kinds, 276

on Lord’s two missions, 133-134

on om, liberation by chanting, 95

on omas Krsna, 95, 97

on personal God, 92

on sex life, religious, 109

on strength of external energy, 274

on surrender, 136

on varndasrama system, 14, 105

on yoga requirements, 152

‘* Bhagavad-gita, Meditation on,”’ by

Sankaracarya, 83-89

Bhagavad-gita, quotations from

on Arjuna surrendering to Krsna, 58, 210,
266

on Bhagavad-gita’s history, 196

on bhaktifor understanding Krsna, 13

on birth, death, etc., miseries of, 252

on bodies as perishable, 212

on Brahma’s life-span, 223

on chanting and worshiping Krsna always,
94

on chanting Krsna’s name as joyful, 95

on creation and annihilation of living entities, 225

on demigod worship, 107, 108

on detachment, 6

on determination hindered by attachments,
169

on devotee as dear to all, 257

on devotee as intelligent & transcendental,
258

on devotee as nonenvious friend, 257

on devotee as saintly always, 258

on devotees as Brahman-realized, 294-295

on devotee’s equal vision, 15, 234-235, 257,
294-295

on devotional service, four kinds requested,
56

on devotional service, transcendence by, 60

on disciplicsuccession, 57, 66

on food for sacrifice vs. for self, 117

an faad afferable ta Krsna, 114, 123, 163

on friendliness to all, 185

on God’s kingdom, 7

on great man’s actions followed, 184,
241-242

THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Bhagavad-gita, quotations from

on knowing Krsna, 240

on knowledge, etc. from Krsna, 249-250

on Krsna as father, 22, 219

on Krsna as source of all, 217

on Krsna as splendor of sun, etc., 220

on Krsna as sun, 220

on Krsna as sun’s & moon’s light, 240, 302

on Krsna as taste in water, 239, 302

on Krsna consciousness elevating all, 211

on Krsna in heart of all, 203, 249-250

on Krsna’s energies, 218

on Krsna’s knowledge, 221

on Krsna’s material energies, 76, 218

on Krsna’s protection from sinful reactions,
180

on liberation by devotional service, 113

on liberation by knowing Krsna, 29, 253,
261

on Lord’s abode, 54

on Lord within all, 267

on lust as world’s enemy, 255-256

on material nature directed by Krsna,
219

on material world as temporary & miserable, 255

on omas Krsna, 95

on perfection, rarity of, 22-23, 67

on realized soul never hankering or lamenting, 157, 260-261

on religion as laws of God, 149

on saintly kings, 66

on Satisfaction in glorifying Krsna, 257

On sense enjoyers, devotional service not
for, 107

on soul as eternal, 26, 237, 251

on soul as eternal & individual, 239, 302

on soul for all, 124, 125

On spiritual life as transcendental, 260

On spiritual master, knowledge from, by
submissive inquiry, 59, 73, 202, 217

On spiritual world as eternal, etc., 21, 236

on sun & moon as Krsna’s eyes, 220

on surrender asked by Krsna, 58, 65, 68,
101, 206, 207

au surrender of wise te Krana, 100, 207,
256

on temperance in eating, etc., 156

on transcendentalist equal to all, 241

on transmigration, 200, 201, 212
Index

Bhagavad-gitd, quotations from
on transmigration compared to changing
clothes, 235
on varnasrama system, 14, 196, 206
on Vedas, Krsna as source & goal of, 95, 98,
203
on worship of Lord by jfanis, 97
Bhagavan
defined by ParasSara Muni, 19
Supreme Lord as, 44
See also: Supreme Lord
Bhagavatam. See: Srimad-Bhagavatam
Bhagavata Purana. See: Srimad-Bhadgavatam
Bhagavat-tattva- vijnanam
verse quoted, 157
Bhaja govindam bhaja govindam
verse quoted, 86
Bhaktas
defined, 12
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord
Bhakti, muktiincluded in, 113
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, 295
quoted on devotional service, material
desires in, 289
quoted on renunciation, 77
quoted on serving Krsna with purified
senses, 262
quoted on sruti & smrtiin devotional service,
99
Bhaktir uttama
defined, 101
See also: Pure devotional service
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, 300
appearance of, 70
& Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, meetings of, 16, 296-297
as Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada’s spiritual master, 70
Caitanya Mahaprabhu rightly represented
by, 78
as Gaudiya Matha’s founder-dcarya, 70
hearing from, 75
impersonal misconception removed by, 78
prayer to, 79-80
Vy4asa-puja offering to, 70-80
Bhaktivedanta Manor, Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada’s lecture at, 54-60
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, His Divine
Grace A.C.
address by, at Conway Hall, 270-278

325

Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada

address by, at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 47

address by, at University of Nairobi,
234-242

arrival in U.S. of, 230

biographical information on, 15-16, 33, 39,
67, 170, 230, 297

books & magazine of, 151

conversation of, with Bhavan’s Journal,
173-181

conversation of, with Bill Faill, 158-164

conversation of, with Cardinal Jean
Daniélou, 122-125

conversation of, with Desmond J.B.
O’Grady, 259-268

conversation of, with Dr. Thoudam
Damodar Singh, 212-228

conversation of, with Lt. David Mozee,
166-172

conversation of, with Professor G.
Kotovsky, 194-211

correspondence of, with Andhra Pradesh
Relief Fund Committee, 182-184

correspondence of, with Dr. J.F. Staal,
90-104

correspondence of, with Lynne Ludwig,
254-258

correspondence of, with T.L. Katidia,
182-184

disciples of. See: Disciples of Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada

initiation of, by Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati,
297

as ISKCON’s founder-dcarya, 49

Krsna consciousness movement started by,
49, 67

literatures of, 204

prayer by, 230-233

sankirtana introduced by, 170

sannyasa accepted by, 297

spiritual master of, 70, 296-297

spiritual master of, instructions by, 283

Vyasa-ptja offering to Bhaktisiddhanta by,
70-80

Bhaktivinoda Thakura, 246

Bhaktisiddhanta’s appearance prayed for by,
70

quoted on Krsna satisfying vraja- vasis, 292,
293
326

Bhakti-yoga

See also: Devotional service to the Supreme

Lord
defined, 132, 287
Lord known only by, 13
senses controlled in, 132
Bhaktya mam abhijanati
quoted, 13
Bhamati, quoted on sruti & smrti, 97, 98, 99
Bharata-bhimite haila manusya-janma yara
verse quoted, 169
Bharata Maharaja, 154, 206
Pariksit Maharaja as descendant of, 45
Bharata-varsa, 154, 206
See also: India
Bhava-mahddavagni-nirvapanam
quoted, 153
Bhavan’s Journal & Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada, conversation between,
173-181
Bhisma, 86
Bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam
verse quoted, 107, 169
Bhiumir apo ‘nalo vayuh
verse quoted, 76, 218
Bhuijate te tv agham papa
verse quoted, 117
Bhiutva bhutvd praliyate
quoted, 237
Bible
commandments of, as not followed, 11,
114-116
killing forbidden by, 122, 123
Bigelow, Dr. Wildred G.

letter to, by Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhu
pada, 49-50

soul-questions of, news article on, 47-48

Bird in cage, analogy of, 76
Birds, two, in tree, analogy of, 95
Birth
body depends on soul for, 49-50
in brahmana family, 137, 198
debts at, 145
desires & activities determine, 141
desires determine, 137, 140
as tree, 141

See also: Body, material; Transmigration

Blind man & materialist, analogy of, 43
Bliss, Lord’s opulences a source of, 44

Boatman and spiritual master, analogy of, 5

THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Bodily conception of life, 25-26, 27-29, 30-33,
66-67, 76, 162-163, 212-213, 218,
234-238, 260, 267, 274-275

See also: Illusion; Materialism

Bodily parts & classes of society, analogy of,
109-110, 188, 197, 198

Body, living, and dead body, example of, 33

Body, material

birth of. See: Birth; Transmigration

cause of varieties of, desire as, 137, 140, 225

compared to boat, 5-6

compared to cage of bird, 76

compared to car, 30-32, 159

compared to clothing, 30-31, 66-67, 124, 234

dead, as unattractive, 37

as dead although live-appearing, 21

development of, phases of, detailed, 237

elements of, three named, 76

gross body, transmigration role of, 28-29

as illusory, 21

illusory beauty of, 37-38

liberation from. See: Liberation

life of, soul as, 33, 49

living, vs. dead, 25, 47, 235

living entity different from, 25-26, 27-29,
30-33, 37-38, 66-67, 76, 158-159,
162-163, 212-213, 218, 234-238,
260, 267, 274-275

as sinful reaction, 137

soul of. See: Soul

subtle, transmigration role of, 28-29

well-being of, from Krsna consciousness,
31-32

Body, spiritual

development of, 239, 301-302

Krsna consciousness prepares, 253

See also: Soul

Body and unattached finger, analogy of, 278

Body’s parts and living entities, analogy of, 2

Bombay lecture by Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada, 70-80

Bose, Jagadish Chandra, 124

Boy asking mother about father, analogy of, 23

Boy’s and girl’s attraction, analogy of, 11

Brahma, 88

in disciplic succession, 72

life-span of, 223

quotations from. See: Brahma-samhita
Brahma-ohitah prasannatma

quoted, 157
Index

Brahma-bhiitah prasannatma
verse quoted, 260-261
Brahma-bhiita stage, 237
Brahmacaris, 68-69, 187
Brahmacarya defined, 128
Brahman
devotee achieves, 60
features of, three described, 114
illumination as Krsna’s effulgence, 8
liberation, 86
realization, happiness from, 237-238
spiritual & eternal existence in, 7
spiritual master knows, 62
Supreme, Supreme Personality of Godhead
as, 44
as transcendental light & heat, 91
Vedanta-siutra begins by inquiring about, 39,
41, 42
Brahmanas
atonement prescribed by, 251
birth in family of, 137
‘“‘by birth’’ unacceptable, 14, 106, 198
Canakya Pandita, 199
compared to brain of body, 109
defined, 109, 196, 197
education for, 14, 186
government role of, 189, 191, 198-199
need of, 109, 205
Pariksit Maharaja cursed by, 39-40
qualified, vs. hereditary, 106
salary not taken by, 199
See also: Varnasrama system
Brahma-samhita
cited on Krsna’s absolute & spiritual nature,
85
quoted on desire trees in spiritual world, 244
quoted on Krsna as controller, & with spiritual form, 292
quoted on Krsna’s description, 175
quoted on Krsna’s spiritual form & Krsna as
origin of all, 79
quoted on speculating on Absolute Truth, 280
Brahma satyam jagan mithya
quoted, 86 :
Brahma-yamala, quoted on Sruti & smrti, etc., 203
Brahmeti paramatmeti
verse quoted, 114
Brahmins. See: Brahmanas
Brhan-na@radiya Purana
cited on chanting as only way, 94

327

Brhan-naradiya Purana
quoted on chanting Hare Krsna as only way,
139, 141, 154-155, 273
Buddha, 154
appearance of, 136
as incarnation of Lord, 106
philosophy of, 86
Buddhism
as a personal religion, 91
vs. Vedic culture, 106
Buddhists
Sankaracarya followed by, 86
spiritual world not understood by, 86

C

Caitanya-caritamrta

quoted on Caitanya Mahaprabhu giving love
of God, 150

quoted on Indian’s Krsna conscious duty,
169

quoted on krsna-premaawakened by sravanam, 10

quoted on spiritual master, 205

Caitanya Mahaprabhu, 56, 57, 65, 197

See also: Caitanya Mahaprabhu, quotations
from

appearance of, 103, 133

& associates of, worshiped together, 134

as authorized incarnation by SrimadBhagavatam, 133

in Bengal preaching, 145

birth of. See: Caitanya Mahaprabhu, appearance of

chanting Hare Krsna advocated by,
133-134, 139, 141-144

chanting Hare Krsna authorized by, 98

cited on spiritual master, 63

conjugal relationship with Lord revealed by,
283-284

in disciplic succession, 72

as golden, 133, 150

history & teachings of, 133-145

as incarnation of Lord, evidence for,
133-136

Krsna consciousness movement authorized
by, 103

Krsna consciousness movement preached
by, 145
328 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Caitanya Mahaprabhu (continued)
as Krsna giving love of Krsna, 138-139, 150
Mayavadis convinced by, 151-152
mission of, 145
Prakasananda Sarasvati converted by,
151-152, 153
Ramdéananda Raya questioned by, 106
renunciation by, 154
represented rightly by Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati, 78
sankirtana as weapon of, 134
sankirtana began by, 149
Spiritual master of, instructed Him to chant,
153
surrender taught by, 138-139
teachings of, 77
worship of, picture for, 134
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, quotations from
See also: Siksdstaka, quoted on
on chanting about Hari, 98
on chanting Hare Krsna as only way,
154-155, 273
on cleansing heart by chanting, 143, 153,
271, 272, 274
on Indian’s Krsna conscious duty, 169
on knower of Krsna qualified as spiritual
master, 205
on Krsna & Vrndavana, 155-156
on Lord’s names as absolute, though countless, 117
on sankirtana, 149, 150-151, 157
On spiritual master, humility before, 57
on world as blazing fire, 153
Caitya-guru
defined, 267
Lord as, 130
Caksur unmilitam yena
verse quoted, 54
Calcutta sankirtana, 204
Calf-milking & Bhagavad-gitda recital, analogy
of, 85
Canada
ISKCON temples in, 49
medical scientist in, 49
Canadian Medical Association, 48
Canakya Pandita, cited on learned man’s
honor, 295
Candragupta, 199
Canitra, 85
Car & body, analogy of, 159

Car and driver, analogy of, 31-32
Cars as illusory solution, 246
Carvaka Muni, 108
Caste system
modern, rejected for varnadsrama system,
106, 109-110
real vs. bogus, 14
reporter asks about, 14
See also: Varnadsrama system
Cats and dogs & nationalists, analogy of,
259-260
Catur-varnyam maya srstam
quoted, 14, 196, 206
Cause, immediate & remote, 219-220
Cause of all, Krsna as, 79
Celibacy of brahmacaristudents, 68-69
Ceto-darpana-marjanam
quoted, 143, 153, 271, 272, 274
Ceto-darpana-marjanam bhava-mahadavagninirvapanam
verse quoted, 149
Chandogya Upanisad, quoted on mercy of
Radha & Krsna, 78
Chanting
See also: Kirtana; Sankirtana
of Christos & Krsta, 112, 117-119
of Hare Krsna maha-mantra
advantages of, 273
for all, 294
analysis of, 146-148
anywhere & everywhere, 271, 299
austerities possible by, 101
authority for, references given, 95
authorized by Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
103, 104
Caitanya Mahaprabhu advocates,
133-134, 139, 141-144
compared to candy for jaundice, 274
as crime remedy, 167, 170-171
devotional service begins by, 287-288
as easiest process, 30
ecstasy from, 10, 147
as fresh always, not tiresome, 143
for God realization directly, 162
as Great Chanting for Deliverance, 147
as initiate’s requirement, 65
in Krsna consciousness movement,
153
Krsna consciousness movement begun
by, 67
. Index

Chanting
of Hare Krsna mahda-mantra
Krsna consciousness revived by, 10
Krsna invoked by, 287-288
liberation by, 144
meaning of, 15, 101, 113
as only way, 94, 139, 155, 273
for peace, 193
as pleasant, 94
as prayer to Lord, 113
purification by, 241, 272-275
at Ratha-yatra, 10
self-realization from, 144
value of, 94, 104
worship of Lord with, 134
as yoga for today, 131-132
liberation by sound of, 95
about Lord, value of, experience proves,
103
about the Lord, authority for, references
given, 94, 98
about Lord as devotional service, 99
about Lord as only way, 103

of Lord’s names, as authorized, references

given, 94-95
of Lord’s names, perfection from, 64
of Lord’s names as associating with Lord,
114
of maha-mantra. See: Chanting of Hare
Krsna mahda-mantra
of om (omkara), authority for, 94
of om (omkara), liberation by, 95
Chemicals’ source as life, example of, 214
Child in mother’s lap, analogy of, 207
Children
of devotees of Lord, opportunity for, 137
protection for, 273
spiritual life important for, 178, 180
Child touching fire, analogy of, 55
Christ
**God’’ meant by, 112
meaning of word, 112
Christ, Lord Jesus, 112-119, 120-121, 122
Christ consciousness, 11, 262
compassion of, 120, 244
crucifixion of, 120
as friend of all, 120
killing forbidden by, 11, 181
obeisances to, 121
as preacher, 63, 120, 121

329

Christ, Lord Jesus
as spiritual master, 121
suffering asked of, 120-121
Christianity, 93
Christian in, as rare, 120
Churches of, for Krsna’s use, 118
conversation on, 112-119
as followed improperly, 11
Krsna consciousness not, 91
Krsna conscious viewpoint of, 120-121,
122-125
See also: Christ, Lord Jesus
‘*‘Christians’’
animal killing by, 120, 122, 123-124, 171
chanting for, 112-113, 117-119
commandments not always followed by, 11,
114-116
compared to pet son, 121
ineffective, 171
meat eating rationalized by, 32
meat eating sanctioned by, 120, 122-—124
slaughterhouses built for meat eating by, 11
unfaithful, 120-121
Christos defined, 112
Cintamani-prakara-sadmasu
quoted, 244
Citizen, good, & religious man, analogy of, 34
Civilization
animalistic standard of, 4
crime in, Krsna consciousness as remedy
for, 166-172
of India, 74
material, vs. spiritual, 74
modern, compared to dog’s race, 175, 179
modern, compared to unmoving train
coach, 5
modern, as dog’s & cat’s, 31
questions as basis of, 39
Cleanliness for health, 13
Clothes & material body, analogy of, 28, 30-31,
124
Communism
Naxalite movement, 184
in Srimad-Bhagavatam, 200
Vedic, vs. modern, 194-211
Conchshell as pure, 202
Conditioned soul. See: Soul, conditioned
Conditioning
to accept body as self, 31-32
to accept untruth as truth, 36
330 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Conditioning (continued)
by material association, 146
of nationalist, 31
of religionists, 22
removal of, process for, 34-35
See also: Illusion
Consciousness
body pervaded by, 49
compared to water, 13
Lord’s, vs. living entity’s, 130
in tree, 141
See also: Soul
Contraception
compared to disturbing apartment, 50
womb made unfit by, 49
Conway Hall address by Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada, 270-278
Corelli, Rae, 48, 49
Court judgment & Lord’s judgment, analogy
of, 102-103, 103-104
Cow & Bhagavad-gita, analogy of, 99
Cows, 122-123, 202
at farm at New Vrndavana, 156
food as milk from, 13
killing of. See: Animal killing; Meat eating
Creation )
compared to train starting, 219
theory of, vs. reality, 224-225
Creeper of devotional service, analogy of, 279
Crime, Krsna conscious solution for, 166-172
Criminal ignorant of law, analogy of, 55

D

Daily Californian, 92
Daiva-varnasrama defined, 106
Daniélou, Cardinal Jean, & Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada, conversation between, 122-125
Dark room & material world, analogy of, 54
Darwin, 224, 236
Davagni defined, 153
Dayananda dasa, 246
Death
birth begins process of, 41
body unattractive by, 37
certainty of, 144
as constant, 253

Death
desires at, body determined by, 140
of human vs. animal, 41-42
ignorance of, 41-43, 143-144
ignored by grhamedhi, 44-45
medical opinion of, 48
Pariksit Maharaja prepares for, 39-40, 42
time of, as uncertain, 42
transmigration details at time of, 28-29
by transmigration of soul, 49
See also: Human life, problems of;
Transmigration
Declaration of Independence, 185-186
Dehdatma-buddhi defined, 31
Dehino ’smin yatha dehe
quoted, 200, 212
verse quoted, 201
Deity worship. See: Supreme Lord, Deity worship of
Demigods
debts to, 144-145
Krsna thought as, by vraja-vasis, 292
Visnu as goal of, 98
worship of, Bhagavad-gitdrejects, 107, 108
worship of, vs. Krsna worship, detailed, 107,
108
Demonscompared to owls, 89
Destiny
born with body & unchangeable, 176-180
changed by Krsna for devotee, 180
Detachment by spiritual activities, 7
Detroit, Krsna Society members at, 103
Devaki, son of, Krsna known as, 18, 85
Devaki-nandana defined, 18
Devan deva-yajo yanti
verse quoted, 108
Devotees of the Supreme Lord
association with, 11, 34-35
austerities of, 13
birth as, by desire, 137
Brahman achieved by, 60
children of, 137
compared to hot iron, 6-7
compassion of, 244, 245
confidence of, 245
as desire trees, 244
destiny changed for, 180
as equal to all, 257
equal vision of, 241
falldown avoided by, 246-247
Index 331

Devotional service to the Supreme Lord

of preaching. See: Preaching of Krsna consciousness

processes of, hearing & chanting as two of, 98

pure, no material motive in, 288-291

neophyte, 255, 257-258 in pure love, 13, 279-296

offenses to, 244 regulative principles (prohibitions) for, 101,

outside life allowed for, 65 117-118

prayers by. See: Prayers relationships in. See: Krsna, relationships

preachers. See: Preaching of Krsna con- with; Supreme Lord, relationships
sciousness with

qualities of, 257 Sankardcarya teaches, 89

respect spiritual master as much as God, 16 satisfies all, 3

as saintly always, 258 as selfless reciprocation, 290-291

as Satisfied & equal to all, 261 with senses purified, 262, 287, 300

satisfied anywhere, 295-296 senses to be used in, 283, 285, 286-287

spiritual master helps, 130 of Six Goswamis, 248

spiritual masters. See: Spiritual master Spiritual world attained by. See: Liberation

See also: Disciples of Bhaktivedanta Swami stages of development of, 231-232
Prabhupada; Krsna, relationships transcendental state attained by, 8
with; Pure devotees; Supreme Lord, types of, requested by Krsna, 56
relationships with; names of individual types of relationships in. See: Krsna, reladevotees tionships with; Supreme Lord, rela
Devotional service to the Supreme Lord tionships with

See also: individual services under Krsna; as universal, 113
Supreme Lord Dharma as religiosity, 281

authorities in. See: Pure devotees; Scrip- Dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam
tures; Spiritual master quoted, 149

authorized by Sruti, smrti, etc., 99 verse quoted, 174

begins by knowing His greatness, 300 Dhrtardastra, 140

bhakta wants only, 12 Dhruva Maharaja, 246

chanting process. See: Chanting Dhruvam sa vai pretya narakan upaiti

compared to a creeper, 279 verse quoted, 249

compared to mother’s service to child, Disciples of Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada

Devotees of the Supreme Lord
financial position of, 66
food.for, as prasdda only, 116-117
as friend to & nonenvious of all, 257
happiness of, 257

12-13
compared to river flowing toward sea, 287
compared to watering tree’s root, 3
conjugal rasa of, 283-284
continues in next life, 4
as dovetailing desires, 282
favorable, vs. unfavorable, 282-283,
285-286
happiness only from, 8, 183
as highest perfection, 280
liberation by. See: Liberation
love for Krsna from, only, 281-282
material conceptions removed by, 8
materialists benefit by, 8

prayer for, Hare Krsna maha-mantra as, 101,

113

advancement of, as verifiable, 104

austerities of, 62, 117-118

caste system not forced on, 14

chanting by, 10, 117-118, 143

cleanliness & health of, 13

complaint against, answered, 254-258

effective through purity, 171

good intentions of, 258

good qualities of, 13

humility & meekness of, 118

as intelligent & brahminically trained, 14

Krsna consciousness movement spread by,
151

as mahatmas, 256

meat eating forbidden for, 123

number of, 64
332 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Disciples of Bhaktivedanta Swami (continued)
outside life allowed for, 65
parents of, 208
regulative principles (prohibitions) for, 101,
117-118
respect him as much as God, 16
taught respect for spiritual master, 16
varieties of, 208
Disciplic succession
for government’s success, 191
necessity of, 56-57
spiritual master in, 56-57, 264
Vedas in, 72
Vydsadeva in, 56
Diseased man & conditioned soul, analogy of,
26
Diviva caksur atatam
verse quoted, 79
‘*Doctor Frog’s philosophy,’’ analogy of, 216
Doctors
Bigelow, Wilfred G., 47-48
death-state opinion of, 48
Dog barking & nationalist challenging, analogy
of, 31
Dog’s race & modern civilization, analogy of,
175, 179
Dosasya drstva guru-laghavam yatha
verse quoted, 251
Dovetailing, 282
Dress or clothing & material body, analogy of,
28, 49, 234, 235
Drona, 86
Drugs
as valueless for God realization, 162
See also: Regulative principles (four prohibitions)
Durban Natal Mercury, 158
Duryodhana, 87
Duskrtinah
characteristics of, 276
defined, 276
Dvapara-yuga, 142
Dvapare paricaryayam
verse quoted, 152
Dva suparna sayuja sakhaya
quoted, 95

E

Earth planet, as Lord’s property, 192

Eating
of meat. See: Meat eating
See also: Food; Prasada
Eating, sleeping, mating, & defending. See:
Animal propensities :
Ecstasies
by chanting, 10
in chanting Hare Krsna mahda-mantra, eight
listed, 147
Education
for brahmanas, 186, 187
college, 186
lacking in modern civilization, 43
about soul required, 66-67, 143, 201,
251-252
for Stidras, 186
See also: Guru-kula
Electrical generator, analogy of, 161
Elements, material, 218-219
listed, 76, 234
Empiricists, philosophy of, 78
Energy
external strength of, 274
Krsna’s eight kinds of, 218-219
of Lord, 271
of Lord, compared to powerhouse energy,
217
marginal, living entities as, 148
separated, eight named, 76
material, strength of, 284
material, vs. spiritual, 148, 227
Enjoyment
as life’s meaning, 34
See also: Happiness; Pleasure, material;
Sense gratification
Equality
for all in Krsna consciousness, 15
as Sage’s vision, 15, 234-235, 257, 294295
Evam parampara-praptam
quoted, 66
verse quoted, 58
Evam prasanna-manaso
verse quoted, 157
Evolution
Darwin’s, vs. actual, 224, 225, 236
See also: Transmigration
Examples, value of, 262
Existence. See: Living entities; Material world;
Soul
Index

F

Factory owner, analogy of, 20

Faill, Bill, & Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada,

conversation between, 158-164

Faith in God

as beginning of spiritual life, 34

of Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada,

230-233

knowledge from, 118

religion more than, 34, 168

required, 73
Fame, Lord has all, 19
Family

beneficial for spiritual progress, two kinds

of, 4-5

of brahmana, birth in, 137

compared to train companions, 45
Family life

material, how time wasted in, 44

Spiritual, vs. material, 43-45

as temporary, 44-45

See also: Children; Grhasthas
Father, Lord as original, 22, 219

Festivals in Krsna consciousness, 103, 183-184,

209
Fire, trees store, 220
Fire and sparks, analogy of, 158
Fire of material existence, analogy of, 266-267,
273
Fish out of water, analogy of, 61, 75
Fontenay-aux-Roses, 204
Food
' for civilized human beings, 13
for devotees of Lord, as prasdda only,
116-117
grhastha distributes, 194
for human beings, types of, 13, 116-117,
123
Lord provides, 275-276
offerable to Krsna, types of, 116, 123, 163
scarcity of, 182-183, 186
in spiritual life, 156-157
in yoga restricted, 128
See also: Prasada
Forgetfulness
of death by animals & foolish men, 41-43,
44-45, 143-144
modes determine degrees of, 50
See also: Illusion

333

Freedom
illusory, conditioned soul feels, 26
real. See: Liberation
French revolution, 207
‘*Frog’s philosophy,’ analogy of, 216
Frustration, misdirected service causes, 3

G

Gambling
forbidden in Krsna consciousness, 63
See also: Regulative principles
Gadadhara, 134
Gandhara, King of, 87
Gandhi, Mahatma, 36, 42
Ganges, 40, 180
Gargamuni, 133
Gaudiya Matha lecture by Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada, 70-80
Gaya, 136
Gita. See: Bhagavad-gita; Bhagavad-gita As It Is
God
description of, 175
See also: Krsna, Narayana; Supersoul,
Supreme Lord
God
defined by Pardsara Muni, 19
as name for Krsna, 112
God consciousness. See: Krsna consciousness
Go defined, 150
Godhead, going back to. See: Kingdom of God,
Liberation; Spiritual world
God realization
compared to coming into sunlight, 263
self-realization follows, 263
by soul knowledge, 50
See also: Krsna consciousness
Gods. See: Demigods
God’s kingdom. See: Kingdom of God; Spiritual world
Gold mine and gold particles, analogy of, 158,
236
Goloka Vrndavana, Krsna’s abode, 86
Gopala Bhatta Goswami. See: Goswamis, Six
Gopi-janas defined, 293
Gopijana-vallabha, Krsna as, 293
Gopis, 288
Goswami defined, 150
Goswamis, Six
compassion of, 248
334 | THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Goswamis, Six (continued)
devotional activities of, 248, 294, 295
named, 149-150
prayer to, 248, 295
Gotra defined, 106
Govardhana Hill, 293
Government
Bhagavaa-gita as reference for, 5
brahmana’s role in, 189, 191, 198-199
cheating of, 226
communist, Vedic, vs. modern, 194211
disciplic succession required in, 191
duty of, 189-190
ideal, vs. present, 188-189, 191
Krsna consciousness should be promoted
by, 167-171
leader of, battle led by, 191
leaders of, should aid Krsna’s movement,
184
perfect, right of, 186
See also: Varnadsrama system
Government law and punishment, analogy of,
27
Government laws & laws of Lord, analogy of,
250
Government manager, analogy of, 24
Government officer & spiritual master, analogy
of, 16
Government official & human being, analogy
of, 3
Govinda
description of, 175
See also: Krsna
Gravity, 222
Grhamedhis
activities of, 44 :
death ignored by, 44-45
defined, 43
vs. grhasthas, 43-45
Grhasthas
charity of, 194
defined, 205
distribution of wealth of, 205
vs. grhamedhis, 43-45
Grhastha ashram defined, 43
Gunas. See: Modes of material nature
Guru, ‘‘genuine guru’’ meant by, 63
Guru. See: Spiritual master

Guru-kula, 187
brahmacaris at, 68-69
defined, 187
Gurv-astaka prayers to spiritual master
quoted on spiritual master as confidential to
Lord, 58-59
quoted on spiritual master honored as much
as Lord, 16, 58
quoted on spiritual master like raincloud,
266
quoted on spiritual master worshiped as
much as Lord, 70
quoted on spiritual master’s & Krsna’s
mercy, 58

H

Haines, Mr. Justice Edson L., 48
Hanuma§n (a Gitacommentator), 97
Happiness
of devotees of the Lord, 257
of grhasthas, vs. that of grhamedhis, 43
from Lord’s association in spiritual existence, 8
of love for Krsna, 281
in material world, as illusory, 298
predestined, 176-180
in spiritual life only, 32, 61, 75, 183
from spiritual realization, 237-238
standards of, 186
Hara defined, 147-148
Hare (Hara) word defined, 15, 147-148
Hare Krsna movement. See: ISKCON; Krsna
consciousness movement
Harer nama harer nama
verse quoted, 139, 141, 154-155, 273
Hari
glorifying, 98
Supreme Lord as, 44
Haridadsa Thakura, humility of, 295-296
Harih purata-sundara-dyuti-kadambasandipitah
verse quoted, 150
Hari-kirtana defined, 142 .
Hari-vamsa, quoted on Brahman illumination, 8
Hatha-yoga, 128
Hearing about the Supreme Lord
from Bhagavad-gita, 83
Index

Hearing about the Supreme Lord
recommended, 73
required, 75
See also: Questioning
Heart
compared to mirror, 272
soul present in, 49
transplants of, 49
Hellish planets, 243
‘Hen’s front and back, analogy of, 115
Hindu, origin of word, 105, 195-196
Hinduism
Dr. J.F. Staal thinks Krsna consciousness is,
90
Krsna consciousness not, 105, 110
Krsna worshiped in, 92
Hiranyakasipu, 252
devotee as, 293
Householders
animals in home of, 241
Krsna conscious, examples of, 246
See also: Family; Family life
Arsikena hrsikesa-sevanam bhaktir ucyate
quoted, 286
verse quoted, 262
Arsikesa
defined, 287
Krsna as, 300
Hrta-jndnahdefined, 107
Human beings
See also: Human life
animal life not meant for, 238
vs. animals, 41, 74, 156, 167-168
like animals. See: Animal propensities
& animals, similarities of, 124
austerity & penance meant for, 68-69
as best life, 77
bodily development & changes of, 237
body of, by transmigration, 41
civilized, meat eating not practiced by, 13
classes of. See: Caste system; Varndsrama
system
Classes of, two, as demons & devotees, 134
compared to government official, 3
consciousness developed in, 124-125
death of. See: Death
debts of, Krsna consciousness removes,
144-145
debts of, to demigods, 144-145

335

Human beings
disservice to, aS misrepresenting Bhagavadgita, 88
duty of, to hear of & glorify Lord, 45
as false proprietors, 192
food for, types of, 116-117, 122, 123-124
great, others follow, 242
levels of, several described, 22
life of, purpose for, 42
Lord approached by four kinds of, 276
lower types of, detailed, 276
materialistic. See: Materialists
oneness among, compared to oneness of
one country’s citizens, 260
perfection among, as rare, 22-23
questioning meant for, 39
relationships of, 270
religion required for, 174
soul in, proof for, 32-33
value of life as, 77
working like dog not meant for, 4
Human life
See also: Civilization; Human beings
vs. animal life, 173-177, 252, 276-277
austerity recommended for, 62
evolution to. See: Transmigration
meaning of, 234
opportunity of, 236
problems in, no material solution for, 24
problems of, birth, old age, disease, & death
as, 143-144
purpose of, 117
for self-realization, 200
sense gratification restricted in, 140, 154
sex life in, 109
spiritual inquiry meant for, 156
value of, 3, 159
Humility
example of, 230-233
value of, 118
Husband as wife’s protector, 15
Hyderabad, committee from, letter from,
182-183

Idam hi pumsas tapasah Srutasya va
verse quoted, 267
336 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Thaiva tair jitah sargo
verse quoted, 294
Ignorance
examples of, four named, 76
as excuse, not accepted, 55
suffering caused by, 54-55
‘See also: Illusion
Ilavrta-varsa, 206
Illicit sex. See: Sex life, illicit
Illusion
of animals, 41, 43, 143-144, 163
of birth & death, 237
of bodily beauty, revelation of, 37-38
of body as self, 25-26, 27-29, 30-33, 66-67,
76, 162-163, 212-213, 218, 234-238,
260, 267, 274-275
compared to cloud, 270-271
of deathlessness, 41
in family life, 43-45
of freedom although bound, 221-222
of Lord as impersonal, 78-79
of Lord being unseen by us, 270-271
of lording it over Nature, 146
of lower types of humans, 276-277
of material enjoyment, 246, 298
material life as, 227
material world as, 21
maya-sukha as, 246
of mental perception, 73
of nationalism, 187-188, 259-260, 262, 275
of oneself being God, 277-278
of proprietorship over Earth, 192
sex in material world as, 21
as temporary, 211
See also: Maya
Immortality
jnanis try for, 12
possible spiritually, 60
Impersonalism
as Buddha taught, 86
as difficult, 129
as dry, 296
vs. Krsna consciousness, 107
in Mayavada philosophy, detailed, 106-107
misconception of, refuted, 78-79
pleasure denied in, 301
as Sankardcarya taught, 83
as side-issue, or one of Lord’s three
features, 91
Siva preached, as Sankaracarya, 86

Impersonalists, preaching not risked by, 299
Incarnations. See: Supreme Lord, incarnations
of
India
Buddhism’s growth in, 106
Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared in, 133
caste system in, vs. varndsrama system, 14,
106, 109-110
civilization of, 74
culture of, Bhagavad-gita describes, 105
as dependent nation once, 296-297
devotees of Krsna in, 208
drought in, 182, 183
*“Hindus’’ of, 105, 195-196
historical leaders of, 198-199, 206
historical names for, 206
Krsna consciousness in, 92, 145
literature of, Russian translations of, 195
meat eating in, 123
Mogulera of, 199
Muhammadans separated from, 211
religion of, as Mayavada influenced, 106
religious opportunity in, 168-169
Spiritual assets of, 209-210
spiritual life in, 180
westernization of, 209-210
women dependent & protected in, 15
Indra, 88
Vrndavana protected from, 292-293
‘In God we trust,’’ 167, 188
Initiation into ISKCON, requirements for, 63
Insect’s life, analogy of, 223
Instructions with new product, analogy of,
29-30
International Society for Krishna Consciousness. See: ISKCON; Krsna consciousness
movement
Intoxication. See: Regulative principles
Iron, hot, & spiritualized living entity, analogy
of, 6-7
ISdvasyam idam sarvam
quoted, 166, 194
verse quoted, 240
ISKCON
founder-dcarya of, 49
headquarters of, 204
help asked from, 182-183
purpose of, 49
temples of, 204-205
See also: Krsna consciousness movement
Index

Islam, 93
See also: Muhammadanism
ISopanisad. See: Sri Isopanisad
ISvara
defined, 129
Supreme Lord as, 44
Isvarah paramah krsnah
quoted, 292
verse quoted, 79
I§varah sarva-bhitanam
quoted, 267
ISvara Puri, 72
Ity adi-sabdebhyah
quoted, 97

Jagannatha, Lord, 296
Jagannatha Puri, 296

Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati appeared at, 70

Jaladuta (ship) , 230, 233
Janmady asya yatah
quoted, 264, 265
Janmddy asya yato ’nvaydd itaratas carthesv
abhijnah svarat
quoted, 265
Janma karma ca me divyam
verse quoted, 29, 253, 261
Janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhiquoted, 252
Janma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara
verse quoted, 169
Jaundice and sugar candy, analogy of, 274
Jayadratha, 87
Jefferson, Thomas, 185
Jesus Christ. See: Christ, Lord Jesus
Jijfidsu sreya uttamam
quoted, 156
Jiva Goswami, 136
See also: Goswamis, Six
Jivah stiksma-svartpo ‘yam
verse quoted, 235
Jivas. See: Living entities; Soul
Jiana process, Lord unknown by, 13
Jndna-vairdgyayos caiva
verse quoted, 19
Jiidna-yajnena defined, 100
Jnadna-yajnena... yajanto mam
~ quoted, 97, 99, 100
Jnidanidefined, 12, 22

337

Jungclaussen, Father Emmanuel, & Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, conversation between, 112-119
Jyotisam ravir amsuman
quoted, 220

K

Kalau defined, 273
Kalau nasty eva nasty eva
verse quoted, 139, 141, 154-155, 273
Kalau stidra-sambhavah
quoted, 197
Kalena balina rajan
verse quoted, 173
Kaler dosa-nidhe rajann
verse quoted, 155
Kali Age, 150
all born suédras in, 197-198
chanting Hare Krsna as only way in, 94, 95
religion disappears in, 173
religion for, chanting Hare Krsna as, 152,
155, 273
spiritual lack in, 74
symptoms of, 131, 154, 167, 173
yoga for, chanting Hare Krsna as, 131-132
Kali-santarana Upanisad, cited on chanting Hare
Krsna mantra, 95
Kalki, appearance of, details of, 136
Kalpa-taru defined, 244
Kama defined, 256
Kama esa krodha esa
verse quoted, 255-256
Kama-haituka, 108
Kamais tais tair hrta-jnanah
verse quoted, 107
Karnsa, 85
Krsna’s relationship with, 284
Kandarpa-koti-kamaniya-visesa-sobham
verse quoted, 175
Karisye vacanam tava
quoted, 210, 250
Karma
defined, 282
freedom from, 232
as material entanglement, 140
process of, Lord unknown by, 13
transmigration according to, 26
See also: Destiny
338 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Karma-kanda defined, 22
Karma-mimamsa philosophy, 108
Karmis
compared to asses, 178
defined, 12, 178
example of, 178
See also: Materialists
Karna, 87
Karpanya-dosopahata-svabhavah
verse quoted, 58, 266
Karuna defined, 120
Kary, Hans, 91, 92
Kashmir, 153
Katha Upanisad
quoted on spiritual life as razor-sharp, 74
quoted on the Supreme Eternal maintaining
all, 274
Kathayantas ca mam nityam
verse quoted, 257
Katidia, T.L., Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada’s correspondence with, 182-184
Kaumara acaret prajnah
quoted, 178, 180
Kennedy, President, 179
Kesdgra-sata-bhdagasya
verse quoted, 235
Kesava Kasmiri, 153
Kevalam defined, 273
Kiba vipra, kiba nydasi, stidra kene naya
quoted, 205
Killing
of animals. See: Animal killing
Bible forbids, 122, 123
Christ prohibited, 120, 122
Civilized, vs. uncivilized, 74
Kingdom of God
as Brahman, 7
liberation to. See: Liberation
as localized although technically everywhere, 7
nature of, described, 7-8
qualifications for attaining, 7
See also: Spiritual world
King ordering punishment, analogy of, 116
Kings
saintly, 66
See also: names of individual kings
King’s police, analogy of, 44
Kintu prabhor yah priya eva tasya
quoted, 59

Kintu prabhor yah priya eva tasya
verse quoted, 70

Kirtana |

defined, 139, 141
to demigods, 142
for Kali Age, others for other Ages, 141,
152

to Lord Hari, Krsna, 142
opinions on, of Dr. J.F. Staal, 97
See also: Chanting; Sankirtana

Kirtanad eva krsnasya
verse quoted, 155

Kirtanam, scripture as, 98

-Kirtanananda Maharaja, 156

Kirtaniyah sada harih

quoted, 98
Kirtayantah

defined, 98

defined (by Dr. J.F. Staal) , 96-97
Knowledge

about Absolute Truth, all knowledge in,

from authorities, 239
demonstration of, required, 213-214
in disciplic succession, 54-55, 72, 221
from Krsna (Sanskrit only), 203
Krsna consciousness movement gives, 23
Lord has all, 19, 20
material, as useless, 86
perfect, Krsna as source of, 23
perfect, vs. imperfect, 213, 216-224, 302
about soul, importance of, 238-239
from spiritual master, 54-55, 60, 221
surrender required for, 73
theoretical, vs. practical, 163
transcendental & nescient, 100
understanding from, 23

Kotovsky, Professor G., & Bhaktivedanta

Swami Prabhupada, conversation between, 194-211

Krishna. See: Krsna

Krpa, 87

Krpambudhi, devotees as, 244

Krsna
See also: Supreme Lord
as absolute, 84, 85, 287-288
as all-attractive, 18, 175 ’
appearance (birth) of, astrologer at, 133
appearance of, compared to policeman’s ad
vent, 149
Index

Krsna

appearance of, reasons for, 149

approached by four kinds of men, 276

& Arjuna in Bhagavad-gita, 82

Arjuna surrendered to, 130, 265-266

attractive features of. See: Krsna, description of; Krsna, opulences of

as authority above all, 21

beauty of, as beauty’s source, 20

Bhagavad-gita as, 83

as Bhagavad-gita’s author, 56

birth of. See: Krsna, appearance of

as cause of all, 79

chanting about. See: Chanting; Sankirtana

compared to ferryman, 87

compared to milker, 85

consciousness all-pervading for Him,
222-223

demigod worship rejected by, detailed, 108

description of, 175

devotees of. See: Devotees of the Supreme
Lord

disciplic succession from. See: Disciplic succession; Spiritual master

energies of. See: Energy

energy of, as Hare, 15

as enjoyer of all, 288

expansions of, for wives’ pleasure, 19

eyes of, sun & moon as, 220

fame of, Bhagavad-gita’s fame as, 20

as father of all, 10, 22, 219

flute of, 288

foods offerable to, 116, 123, 163

form of, spiritual, 79, 83, 175, 292

as goal of all spiritual processes, 89

as Gopijana-vallabha, 293

Govardhana Hill lifted by, 293

as Hrsikesa, 300

inimical behavior toward, His reaction to,
285

Karhsa wanted to kill, 284

kirtana meant for, 98

knowing about, liberation by, 85-86, 137,
240, 253, 261, 302

knowledge of His, Bhagavad-gita shows, 20

liberation of same form as, 86

as Lord always, 293

love for, as devotional service’s basis, 299

love for, from devotional service, 281-282

love for, pure, 13, 279-296

339

Krsna

love for, revival of, 257
mercy of, 87
missions of, two, 134
name, etc. of, identical to Him, 84, 85,
287-288
name of praised by Jesus Christ, 112
omas, 94
opulences of, six detailed, 19-20
parents of, 85
pastimes of, with His devotees. See: Krsna,
relationships with
pastimes of, in Krsnaloka, 280
pastimes of, in Vrndavana, 292-293
pleasure potency of, 301
prayer to, by Sankaracarya, 83-84, 85,
86-88
prayer to, mahd-mantra as, 15
as purusottama, 288
quotations from. See: Bhagavad-gita, quotations from
related as father to us, 10, 22, 219
relationships with, 280, 299-300
of Arjuna, 18, 58, 82, 130, 265-266
as enemy, examples of, 284-285, 293
examples of, 301
of gopis, 288
of Hiranyakasipu, 293
of Patana, 285
as selfless reciprocation, 290-291
types of, 300-301
of Vrndavana residents, 292-293
of Yasoda, 293
remembrance & forgetfulness due to, 250
representatives of. See: Devotees of the
Supreme Lord; Pure devotees; Spiritual master
as sac-cid-dnanda-vigrahah, 292
service to. See: Devotional service
sex real in, 21
as source of all, 217
as Spiritual master of Arjuna, 58, 95
Srimad-Bhagavatam glorifies, 98
strength of, in killing Pitana, 19
as sun, 220
as sun’s, moon’s & star’s splendor, 220
as sun’s & moon’s light, 240, 302
aS supreme, 84
as Supreme Lord, unimportant to pure
devotees, 292
340

Krsna (continued)
surrender asked by, 58, 65, 68, 101, 206,
207, 256, 298

surrendered to by Arjuna, 58, 130, 265-266

surrender taught by, 138
surrender to, fear of, 298
surrender to, protection by, 58, 65, 207
surrender to, by wise, 101, 256
as transcendental, 83, 85
uncle of, 140
as Vedas’source & goal, 95
as veda-vit & vedanta-krt, 99
Visnu as, 89
Vrndavana favored by, 292-293
as water’s taste, 239, 302
wealth of, 19
wives of, 19
worship of
Bhagavad-gita prescribes, 94
by chanting Hare Krsna mahda-mantra.
See: Chanting, of Hare Krsna
maha@-mantra
vs. demigod worship, 107, 108
form of, as highest, 282
by Hindus, 92
by Sankaracarya, 83-89
Sankaracarya orders, 84, 86
as Yasoda-nandana, 293
Krsna
as name best for God, 18
name defined, 10, 15, 18, 147-148, 158
Krsna consciousness
acceptance of, by Westerners, 101
as all for Krsna, 132
awakening of, 10-11
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada told to
teach, 16
change of position not required for, 210
chanting process of. See: Chanting
& Christ consciousness, 11, 262
‘‘Christians’’ don’t attain, 11

compared to boy’s attraction for young girl,

11

compared to generating electricity, 161

compared to rising sun, 209

crime problem, solution of, 166-172

as daiva-varnasrama, 106

devotees’ association awakens, 11

direct process of, as chanting Hare Krsna,
162

THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Krsna consciousness

as dormant within everyone, 10-11

as dovetailing with Lord’s consciousness,
130

as easiest process for this Age, 152

as enjoyment, 34

equal vision of, 241

as eternal, 143-142, 206

fortunates accept, 244-245

government should promote, 167-171

happiness from, 8, 32, 61, 75, 183, 281

higher taste in, 35

human energy meant for, 176-180

vs. impersonalism, 107

invitation to, 64, 92, 102, 119, 184

Jesus Christ preached, 120-121

liberation by, 29, 137, 253, 261

living entity’s relationship with Lord shown
by, 3

opinions on, of Dr. J.F. Staal, 93

as Original consciousness, 13, 146

peace from, 241

as peace solution, 192-193

as a personal religion eternally, 91

philosophy of, strength of, 78

preaching of. See: Preaching of Krsna consciousness

process of. See: Devotional service to the
Supreme Lord

pure, material motives absent in, 288-291

qualifications for, 67

qualities of, 132

as rare, 67-68

vs. religions of world, no criticism for, 145

reviving, 146-147, 158, 208-209

as science, 25, 27-28, 32-34, 64, 160,
201-203

by seeing Krsna everywhere, 302

as solution to problems of birth, death, etc.,
252-253

stages of, 34-35, 162, 231-232

suffering relieved by, 30-32

as universal, 205, 211

as yoga, highest, 128

See also: Devotional service; Krsna consclousness movement

Krsna consciousness movement

See also: ISKCON
advantages of, 155
animal killing forbidden in, 123
Index

Krsna consciousness movement

as authentic, 92, 141, 161

as authorized, 3, 64-65, 103

beginning & growth of, 18, 67, 151,
161

begun in West by Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada, 170, 296-297

vs. bogus spiritual systems, 30

bradhmanas trained in, 14

as cultural movement, 105

dress in, 161

effective through purity, 171

vs. faith & religion, 105

farms of. See: New Vrndavana

festivals of, 103, 183-184, 209

financial help for, 65

Godhead reached by following, 9

Hinduism different from, 109

initiation into, requirements for, 63

invitations to, 92, 102, 119, 184

joining, 63, 205

knowledge of God given by, 2, 23

literature of, 8, 28, 30, 204

mission of, 20, 28, 49, 64, 94, 110, 145,
234

opinions on, of Dr. J.F. Staal, 90, 91-93

popularity of, 64, 208, 259

preachers of. See: Preaching of Krsna consciousness

principle, basic, of, as dovetailing with Lord,

purpose of. See: Krsna consciousness movement, mission of

quality, not quantity, important in, 68

suffering relieved by, 31

temples of, 102, 155-156

training as brahmanas in, 14

understanding, as more important than join
ing, 28

as universal, 11, 27

varnasramasystem promoted by, 106
Krsna-kirtana defined, 294
Krsnaloka, activities in, 280
Krsna-prema defined, 281
Krsnaya krsna-caitanya
verse quoted, 138, 150
Krsta defined, 112
Krte yad dhyayato visnum

verse quoted, 152
Krtidefined, 276

341

Ksatriyas
defined, 109, 196, 197
Pariksit Maharaja as, 198
See also: Varnasrama system
Ksurasya dhara nisita duratyaya
verse quoted, 74
Kuruksetra, Battle of, 130
Kuruksetra battlefield compared to river, 86

L

Labdhva suduriabham idam bahu-sambhavante
verse quoted, 76-77
Laborer class. See: Stidras
Laksmi, 83
Lanka, 5
Leddy, J. Francis, 48
Lennon, John, 62
Liberation
by chanting Lord’s names, 95, 144
death inspires preparation for, 41
as desirable, 7
desire for, of recluses, 247
by devotional service, 9, 60, 95, 113, 255
from hellish life, by devotee’s mercy, 245
as immortality attained by worship of Lord,
100
impersonal, 285
by Krsna consciousness, 29, 85-86, 137,
\ 240, 253, 261, 302
through Krsna consciousness movement’s
principles, 9
from material modes of nature, 231-232
Prahlada Maharaja not anxious for, 247
pure devotees don’t desire, 289-290
qualifications for attaining, 7
by surrender to Lord, 274
types of, described, 289
Life
creation of, by scientists never, 213-216,
224
meaning of, as enjoyment, 34
origin of, 224
phases of, six named, 212
See also: Living entities; Soul
Life from life, not matter, 212-228
examples of, 216, 225
Life’s companions compared to train companions, 45
342 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

‘*Liquid Beauty,’’ story of, 36-37
Living entities
aquatic species of, 221
body of, self as different from. See: Living
entity, as soul, not body
compared to drops of ocean, 277
compared to gold particles, 158, 236
compared to parts of a body, 2
compared to screw of machine, 278
compared to sparks of fire, 158
creation & annihilation of, 225
defects of, 239
as enjoyers falsely , 288
forgetfulness by, as suffering’s cause, 41
free willof, 250
friendliness to all, 185
godly qualities of , 235-236
identity of. See: Living entity, as soul, not
body
Krsna conscious. See: Devotees of the
Supreme Lord
liberation for. See: Liberation
vs. Lord, 50, 215, 277-278.
& Lord, similarities between, 38, 235-236,
277, 278
from Lord originally, 50
as marginal energy, 148
quota for, 240-241
as servants of God, 2-3, 275-278
service to Lord by. See: Devotional service
to the Supreme Lord
as sons of God, 22
as soul, not body, 25-33, 66-67, 76,
158-159, 162-163, 212-213, 218,
234-238, 260, 267, 274-275
soul in all, 234-239
species of, 22
as spiritual, 74
Spiritualized, compared to hot iron, 6-7
sufferings of. See: Suffering
as superior energy, 219
See also: Animals; Human beings; Soul
Logic

deductive & inductive processes of, 216-217

rational argument must use, 32-33
London Broadcasting Co. interview of Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, 25-35
London Times
interview with Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada, 61-69

London Times
‘**Krsna Chant”’ article in, 151
‘*Lord’s Prayer,”’ 112
Los Angeles Times, \etters in, on Krsna consciousness movement, 90, 91-93
Lotus & Mahabharata, analogy of, 87
Love
for Lord. See: Krsna, love for; Supreme
Lord, love for
in Lord originally, 265
vs. lust, 255-256
Ludwig, Lynne, & Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada, correspondence between,
254-258
Lust
vs. love, 255-256
removed by woman’s ruse, 37
See also: Desires, material

M

Mac-citta mad-gata-prana
verse quoted, 257
Machine with screw attached, analogy of, 278
Madhvacarya, 56, 65, 72, 203
quoted on chanting about Hari, 98
Maha-bhdaga, devotee as, 244
Mahabharata
Bhagavada-gita in, 82, 83, 87
compared to lotus, 87
as history, 83 ,
by Vyasadeva, 72, 83
Mahdjano yena gatah sa pantha
quoted, 71
Maha-mantra
defined, 15, 147
Krsna consciousness revived by, 10
See also: Chanting of Hare Krsna mahamantra
Mahan hi sabdasya prayoga-visayah
quoted, 102
Maha-Purana, Srimad-Bhdgavatamas, 195
Maharajas. See: individual names
Maha-sano maha-padpma
verse quoted, 256
Mahatma defined , 256
Mahatmas
devotees of Krsna as, 256-257
Index

Mahdatmas
as soul surrendered to Krsna, 101, 207
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord
Male & female, Krsna & His energy as original, 15
Mam ca yo ’vyabhicarena
verse quoted, 60, 113, 260
Mam eti
quoted, 240, 254, 302
Mam evaisyasi yuktvaivam
verse quoted, 56
Mam hi partha vyapasritya
verse quoted, 211
Mam upetya punar janma
verse quoted, 255
Manditkya Upanisad, cited on omkara, 94
Mankind. See: Human beings
Man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
verse quoted, 56
Mantrartha-vadadi
quoted 97
Mantras
bogus, for becoming God, 62
effective due to spiritual master, 72
Hare Krsna mahd-mantra. See: Chanting, of
Hare Krsna mahd-mantra
om begins, 95
See also: Chanting
Manu-smrti, 195, 199-200
Manusyanam sahasresu
quoted, 67
verse quoted, 22
Marijuana. See: Regulative principles
Marjanam defined, 272
Marriage, sex life requires, 63
Martyaloka defined, 77
Marut, 88
Material attachment. See: Attachment, material
Material body. See: Body, material
Materialism
happiness can’t come from, 31, 61, 75, 183,
298
illusion of. See: Illusion
sex life as basis of, 256
& spiritual life incompatible, 68-69
of West, destruction of facilities of, 242
See also: Sense gratification
Materialists
compared to blind man, 43
discomfort created by, 246
Krsna consciousness doesn’t interest, 67

343

Materialists
as mad, examples of, 140
as polished animals, 4, 24
wealthy men not necessarily, 66
Material life
ancient beginning of, 7
compared to banyan tree, 8
problems of, four named, 154
VS. spiritual life, 8, 156
See also: Materialism; Materialists
Material literature as stools & vomit, 58
Material nature, modes of. See: Modes of material nature
Material nature. See: Nature, material
Material world
compared to blazing fire, 266-267, 273
compared to darkened room, 54
compared to prison, 22, 257
dangers of, 255
as dark, 54
development of, phases of, 237
devotee’s view of, vs. materialist’s, 261
happiness in. See: Happiness
illusion in. See: Illusion
liberation from. See: Liberation
as Martyaloka, 77
as miserable & temporary, 255
position in, as temporary, 60
as quarter of creation, 135
as reflection, perverted, of spiritual world,
21
as relative, 261, 223
scriptures accompany, 29-30
sex in, as illusory, 21
VS. Spiritual world, 7, 8, 21, 84, 135
struggle for existence in, 295
sufferings in. See: Suffering
Matter
from life, not matter, examples of, 213-215,
219, 227
life as source of, not vice versa, 212-228
Maya
defined, 146, 246, 255
surrender to, 207-208
See also: Illusion
Maydadhyaksena prakrtih
quoted, 219
Maya-sukhaya defined, 246
May4avada philosophy of Sankaracarya,
detailed, 106
344 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Mayavadis converted by Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
151-152
Meat eating
animal birth results from, 125
by ‘‘Christians,”’ 11, 171
‘‘Christians’”’ sanction, 120, 122-124
civilized humans don’t practice, 13
facility for, 125
forbidden, 163-164
forbidden in Krsna consciousness Society,
63, 123
in India, 123
necessary rarely, 123
Medical treatment & atonement, analogy of,
251
Medicine for each patient, analogy of, 103
Meditation
bogus, vs. real, 160
for past Ages, 141-142, 152
real, vs. bogus, 160-161
sense control in, 272
‘**Meditation on the Bhagavad-gita’’ by
Sankaracdrya, 82-89
Men & women equal in Krsna consciousness,
15

Mental platform, 162
Merging with God, janis try for, 12
Metaphysical defined, 125
Milk, foods from, 13
Mind
compared to mirror, 270
illusion in, 73
as material, 76
Mirror of heart, analogy of, 272
Mirror of mind, analogy of, 270
Miseries
materialism can’t stop, 23-24, 273
Nature’s three types of, 55
as predestined, 176-180
types of, four discussed, 252
types of, four listed, 156
types of, three named & examples given, 55
See also: Suffering
Modes of material nature
compared to colors, 159
compared to different conditions for spark’s
landing, 50
liberation from. See: Liberation
soul falls into, 50
transmigration according to, 26, 42-43, 159
varnasrama based on, 105

Moksa. See: Liberation
Money as karmis’ goal, 12
Monism. See: Impersonalism
Monod, Prof. Jacques, 108
Monotheism of Western culture, 94
Montreal Gazette quoted on soul research,
47-48
Moon
as Krsna’s eye, 220
light of, as Krsna’s splendor, 220
Moscow News, 194
Mother’s love & devotee’s love, analogy of,
12-13
Mozee, Lt. David, & Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada, conversation with, 166-172
Mrdanga, 151
Miudha defined, 7, 138, 178, 276
Miudhas, characteristics of, 276
Muhammadanism, 91
Muhammadans, 211
Haridasa Thakura born as, 296
Mukha-bahtra-pada-jah
quoted, 198
Mukti, 9
See also: Liberation
Mumuksubhih parityadgo
verse quoted, 77
Mundaka Upanisad
quoted on guru’s knowledge of Brahman, 62
quoted on soul and Supersoul, 95
quoted on spiritual master as required, 55,
71, 264
Muslims, Hindu word from, 105
Mystic, 162
Mystic powers
eight listed, 131
yogis try for, 12

N

Na caiva na bhavisyamah
verse quoted, 239
Na ced ihaivapacitim yathamhasah
verse quoted, 249
Na hanyate hanyamane sarire
quoted, 251
Nairobi, University of, address at, by Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, 234-242
Naitan vihaya krpanadn vimumuksa eko
verse quoted, 247
~ Index

Naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaranyas
verse quoted, 245-246, 247
Na jayate mriyate
quoted, 251
Na jayate mriyate va kadacin
verse quoted, 26, 237
Na martya-buddhyasuyeta
verse quoted, 71
Namasyantas ca mam bhaktya
verse quoted, 94
Namnam akari bahudhda nija-sarva-saktis
quoted, 117
Namo maha-vadanyaya
verse quoted, 138, 150
Nana-sastra-vicaranaika-nipunau sad-dharmasamsthapakau
verse quoted, 248
Nanda-nandana defined, 18
N@nogra-yatanan neyat
verse quoted, 244, 248
Napnuvanti mahatmanah
verse quoted, 255
Narada Muni, 56, 299
in disciplic succession, 72
as spiritual master of Vydsadeva, instructs
him to describe Personality of Godhead, 41
Na@rada-pancaratra
cited on chanting Hare Krsna, 95
quoted on serving Lord by purified senses,
286
Naradhama
characteristics of, 276-277
defined, 276, 277
Narayana, 84
liberation of same form as, 86
meditation on, yoga as, 128
See also: Supreme Lord
Na tad bhasayate stiryo
verse quoted, 54
Nationalism
as dog’s mentality, 31
error of, 187-188
illusion of, 259-260, 262, 275
Nature, material
accused by politicians, 44
controlled by Lord, 44
controls all conditioned souls, 26
laws of, as inviolable, 27, 55, 192
lording over, attempt at, 146
material, phases of, detailed, 237

345

Nature, material
materialists conquered by, 5
miseries of, three types of, 55
source of, Lord as, 217
Na tv evaham jatu ndsam
verse quoted, 239
Nayam deho deha-bhajam nrloke
quoted, 154
Nectar of Devotion, The, 295
Nehru, Jawaharlal, 200
New Jagannatha Puri, 155
New Navadvipa, 155
New Vrndavana
history & programs of, 155-156
milk preparations from, 13
New York City, Krsna consciousness movement in West begun at, 67, 151, 297
Niederalteich Monastery, 112
Nigama-kalpataror galitam phalam
quoted, 195
verse quoted, 98
Nimai Pandita (Caitanya Mahaprabhu), 153
Nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe
verse quoted, 77
Nirdosam hi samam brahma
verse quoted, 294
Nitya defined, 212
Nityadnanda, 134
Nitya-siddha krsna-prema ‘saddhya’ kabhu naya
verse quoted, 10
Nityo nityanadm cetanas cetananam
quoted, 190, 274
Nixon, Richard M., 187
Nixon, Sandy, & Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, conversation of, 10-17
Nondevotees. See: Atheists; Impersonalists;
Materialists

O

O’Grady, Desmond J.B., & Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada, conversation between, 259-268

Om (omkara) as Lord in sound, 94

Om ajnidna-timirandhasya

verse quoted, 54
Om tad visnoh paramam padam

verse quoted, 98
Opulences of Absolute Truth, six listed, 36
Owllike demons, analogy of, 89
346 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Pada defined, 59
Padma Purana
cited on number of species, 234
cited on Siva preaching Mayavada philosophy, 86
quoted on mantra from spiritual master, 72
Paisaca-bhdasya, cited on kirtayantah, 97
Pakistan, 183, 206
Pancaratrasas Vedic evidence, 99, 203
Pancopasana described, 107
Pandavas, 140
Panditah sama-darsinah
quoted, 257
Paramam defined, 7
Paramatma defined, 129
See also: Supersoul
Parampara. See: Disciplic succession
Param vijayate sri-krsna-sankirtanam
quoted, 157
Parasara Muni
quoted on opulences of the Lord, 19
as Vydsadeva’s father, 19
Paras tasmat tu bhavo ‘nyo
verse quoted, 21, 236
Parasya saktir vividhaiva Sriiyate
quoted, 271
Pardoned defendent, analogy of, 180
Pariksit Maharaja, 98
compassion of, 244, 248
cursed to die, 39-40
death of, preparation for, 39-40, 42
as ksatriya, 198
quoted on hellish planets, 244, 248
Partha defined, 18
Partha-sarathi defined, 18
Paschal Lamb, sacrifice of, 123
Pastimes of the Supreme Lord. See: Supreme
Lord, pastimes of
Patanfijali, quoted on authority of verses,
102
Patram puspam phalam toyam
verse quoted, 116
Pavitra defined, 132
Peace
formula for, 192-193
from Krsna consciousness, 241
Penance (atonement), 251
Personalism, religions accepting, 91

Phalena pariciyate
quoted, 101, 103
Philosophers’ varying opinions, 103
Pibata bhdgavatam rasam alayam
verse quoted, 98
Pious activities, Americans benefit from, 20
Plants
consciousness in, 141
killing of, prohibited when unnecessary,
116-117
killing of, sinful reaction for, 116-117
soul in, 124 |
Pleasure, material
as predestined, 176-180
as same in any species, 177
as temporary, 298
Pleasure potency, soul as part & parcel of, 301
Poetry for glorifying Lord, 267-268
Poison’s power & soul’s power, analogy of, 213
‘*Polished animals,’ 4, 24
Postdated check, analogy of, 215-216
Prabhasmi Sasi-stiryayoh
quoted, 240, 302
Prabhu defined, 59
Prabhupada, Bhaktivedanta Swami. See:
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
Prabhupdda defined, 59
Prahlada Maharaja
benedictions unwanted by, 289
compassion of, 245, 247
as householder, 246
quoted on beginning Krsna consciousness in
childhood, 178
quoted on compassion for conditioned
souls, 247
quoted on devotee’s compassion, 245
quoted on protection, 273
Prakasananda Sarasvati, 151-152, 153
Prakrtidefined, 15
Pramanas defined, 203
Pranavah sarva-vedesu
quoted, 95
Pranava omkara. See: Chanting, of om; Om
Prapancikataya buddhya
verse quoted, 77
Praptasya kalyana-gunarnavasya
verse quoted, 266
Prasdda
defined, 167-167n
devotee eats only, 116-117
Index

Prasadda
distribution, 167, 170-171
for Krsna consciousness, 163-164
as Krsna’s remnants, 123
as sacrificial remnants, 117
Prayena deva munayah sva-vimukti-kama
verse quoted, 247
Prayenalpayusah sabhya
quoted, 154
Prayers
to Bhagavad-gita, 82
to Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, 79-80
by Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada,
230-233
for bodily necessities, as material, 11-12
for bread, 275, 276
to Caitanya Mahaprabhu, by Rtipa
Goswami, 138, 150
to Goswamis, Six, 295
Hare Krsna maha-mantraas, 15, 101, 113
to Krsna by Sankaracarya, 83-84, 85, 86-88
‘*Lord’s Prayer,”’ 112
of surrender to Krsna, 247-248
to Vyadsadeva, 82
Preaching of Krsna consciousness
vs. Christianity, 114
compared to giving right medicine, 208
with compassion & tolerance, 120
as duty, 157
everywhere, 298-299
by Jesus Christ, 120-121
purity for, 171
risks in, 245
by spiritual master, 298
as spiritual master’s business, 63
See also: Sankirtana
Prema defined, 256
Prison, analogy of, 22
Prthivite ache yata nagaradi grama
verse quoted, 150
Protection
material, as unsure, 273-274
by surrender to Lord, 58, 65
Prtha, son of, 18
Punishment by Nature’s laws, 27
Puranas
as Vedic evidence, 99, 203
by Vyasadeva, 72
Pure devotees
as equal to all, 294-295

347

Pure devotees
Krsna as God unimportant to, 292
liberation not desired by, 289-290
motivated by service desire only, 288-291
service to, 231
Pure devotional service
as bhaktionly, 101
material tinge absent in, 9
Purification, processes of, 272
Purusa defined, 15, 288
Purusottama, Krsna as, 288
Puitana, 19
Krsna’s relationship with, 285

Q

Questioning
about Absolute Truth, Vyasadeva recommends, 45
by children constantly, 39
by grhasthas vs. that of grhamedhis, 43-45
humans meant for, 42
by intelligent men, 39
material, vs. spiritual, 42, 43
of Pariksit Maharaja, Vyasadeva answers, 45
perfect answers to, 263-264
on spiritual life, humans meant for, 42, 156
of students today, 263
as symptom of human life, 252
of temporary life, 45

R

Radha-krsna-padaravinda-bhajananandena mattalikau
verse quoted, 248
**Radha-Madhava,’’ quoted on Krsna & vrajavasis, 292, 293
Radharani
as pleasure potency of Krsna, 301
Rtipa Goswami served by, 290
Raghunatha Bhatta Goswami. See:
Goswamis, Six
Raghunatha dasa Goswami. See: Goswamis,
Six |
Raja-guhyam defined, 132
Raja-vidyd defined, 132
348 , THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Rama, word defined, 147-148
Ramacandra, Lord, 222
Ramananda Raya, cited on varnadsrama
system, 106
Ramanujacarya, 56, 65, 153, 203
Ramayana, 98
Rasas
defined, 284
See also: Krsna, relationships with; Supreme
Lord, relationships with
Raso ‘ham apsu kaunteya
quoted, 239, 302
Ratha-yatra festival, 10, 155, 209
Ratrim yuga-sahasrantam
verse quoted, 223
Ratry-agame praliyante
verse quoted, 225
Ravana, 5
Regulative principles (four prohibitions), 63,
68-69, 101, 117-118, 204, 210-211
Reincarnation. See: Transmigration
Relativity of material world, 223
Religion
for Age of present, 155
of animal killers, 181
compared to government laws, 34
defined, 11, 35
dictionary definition of, 34
disinterest in, 68, 173-174
first-class, as unmotivated (materially), 12
first-class, stages of, 34-35
goal of, love of God as, 35, 169
from God, not man, 34, 91, 190
for human beings, 174
in India, 168-169
of India, as Mayavada influenced, 106
as obedience to God’s laws, 34, 91, 149,
174-175
real, vs. bogus, 11, 35, 168-169, 181
Russia opposes, 174
as science, 34
transcendental, Krsna consciousness as, 113
Religions
Krsna consciousness beyond, 27
Krsna consciousness doesn’t criticize, 145
personal, 91
Religiosity, material, 281
Renunciation
Krsna conscious, vs. incomplete, 77
Krsna consciousness literatures teach, 8

Renunciation
Lord has all, 19, 20
See also: Brahmacaris; Brahmacarya; Sannyasa
Respect
types of, two given, 118
value of, 118
Rg Veda
quoted on demigods looking toward Visnu,
98
quoted on Lord’s lotus feet as goal, 79
Rice-husk beating, analogy of, 100
River flowing & devotional service, analogy of,
287
**River’’ of Kuruksetra, analogy of, 86
Robinson, Mike, & Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada, conversation between,
25-35
Rudra, 88
Rupa Goswami
in disciplic succession, 72
quoted on Caitanya Mahaprabhu giving love
of God, 138, 150
quoted on devotional service, material
desires in, 289
quoted on renunciation, 77
quoted on sruti & smrtiin devotional service,
99
served by Radharant, 290
See also: Goswamis, Six
Russia. See: Soviet Union

S

Sabda-brahma defined, 72
Sa buddhiman manusyesu
quoted, 258
Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha defined, 83
Sacrifice, food from, 117
Sad-gosvamy-astaka
quoted on scripture study by Six Goswamis,
295
quoted on Six Goswamis’ compassion, 248
Sadhur eva sa mantavyah
verse quoted, 258
Sa eva go-kharah
quoted, 260
Sages, equal vision of, 15, 234-235, 257, 294
Index

Sa gunan samatityaitan
verse quoted, 60, 113, 260
Sahasra-yuga-paryantam
verse quoted, 223
Saints. See: Acdryas; Devotees of the Supreme
Lord
Sa kaleneha mahata
verse quoted, 57
Saksdad-dharitvena samasta-sastrair
quoted, 16, 58
verse quoted, 70
Salokya defined, 289

_ Salvation. See: Liberation

Salya, 87
Samadhi defined, 129
Samah sarvesu bhitesu
quoted, 241
verse quoted, 260-261
Sama Veda, 88
Sambhala, 136
Sambhity-amrtam asnute
quoted, 100
Samipya defined, 289
Sampradaya. See: Disciplic succession
Sampradaya-vihina ye
verse quoted, 72
Samsara-davanala-lidha-lokaverse quoted, 266
Samyak defined, 139
Sanatana defined, 206
Sanatana Goswami, 290
_ See also: Goswamis, Six
Sankardacarya, 203
‘‘followers’’ of, 86, 88
impersonalism as taught by, 83
Krsna worshiped by, 83-89
Krsna worship ordered by, 84, 86
Mayavada philosophy of, detailed, 106
mission of, 106
pancopasana system of, 107
quoted on matter vs. spirit, 86
as Siva, 86, 88
spiritual knowledge advocated by, 45
surrender to Krsna taught by, 89
writings of, with commentary by Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, 82-89
Sankhya defined, 218
Sankirtana
for all towns & villages, 150-151
beginning of present movement of, 149

349

Sankirtana
benefits from, examples of, 183-184
benefits of, Caitanya Mahaprabhu tells, 149
as Caitanya Mahdaprabhu’s movement,
149-157
Calcutta, 204
as crime remedy, 166, 167, 170-171
defined, 139, 166
rain from, 183
as restricted to no one, 170-171
as weapon of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, 134
See also: Chanting; Kirtana
Sannyasa
of Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada,
297
recommended, 246
Santa defined, 280
Sarsti defined, 289
Sartipya defined, 289
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, 152
Sarva-bhitatma-bhutatma
quoted, 257
Sarva-dharman parityajya
quoted, 68, 101, 206, 207
verse quoted, 58, 65
Sarva-karana-karanam
defined, 219-220
Sarva-phala-tyaga
quoted, 101
Sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto
quoted, 249-250
verse quoted, 203
Sarvatma, Supreme Lord as, 44
Sarvatra labhyate daivad
verse quoted, 177
Sarvatra pracara haibe mora nama
verse quoted, 150
Sarva-yonisu
quoted, 124
Sarva-yonisu kaunteya
quoted, 125
verse quoted, 22, 219
Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam
quoted, 64
verse quoted, 262
Sarvopanisado gavo
quoted, 99
SaSi-stirya-netram
quoted, 220
Sastras. See: Scriptures, Vedas; Vedic literature

 
350 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Satatam kirtayanto mam
verse quoted, 94
Satya-yuga, 152
life-span & meditation in, 141
yoga & life-span in, 131
Sa vai pumsam paro dharmo
verse quoted, 12
Sa yat pramanam kurute
verse quoted, 184, 241-242
Schools
guru-kula, 68-69, 187
Spiritual education for, 67
See also: Education
Science
defined, 33
Krsna consciousness as, 25, 27-28, 32-34,
201-203
from Krsna conscious viewpoint, 212-228
living body vs. dead body not studied by, 47
material, vs. spiritual, 25
modern, like Sankhya philosophy, 218
soul hidden to, 50
soul must be presented on basis of, 50
Scientists
compared to frogs, 216
criminal, 227
harmful creations of, 276
as ignorant of soul, 33
inductive or ascending process of, 216-217
life created by ‘‘in future,’’ 215-216
pride of, 220-221, 222
soul unseen by, 213
spiritual world unreachable by, 21
Scriptures
accepted as they are, 30, 115
compared to product instructions, 29-30

debaters on, compared to lawyers, 102-103,

103-104

denied by fools, 223-224

interpretation of, as unnecessary, 116

as kirtana, glorification of Lord, 98

knowledge from, 221

as Lord’s instructions accompanying creation, 29-30

quotations from, sometimes contradict, 103

quoted often in Krsna consciousness, 26

Six Gosvamis’ study of, 248

See also: Vedas; Vedic literatures; names of
individual scriptures

Self-realization
by chanting Hare Krsna, 142, 144

Self-realization
God realization followed by, 263
as life’s aim, 200
process of. See: Devotional service to the
| Supreme Lord
See also: Krsna consciousness
Sense gratification
automatically comes, 176
as frustrating, 281
happiness never from, 281
human life not for, 154
as illusory, avidya, 100
madness from, examples of, 140
“‘polished animals’’ want only, 5
wealthy sons misguided for, 5
Senses
conditioned, vs. original, 287
controlled by Krsna consciousness, 132
imperfect, 221
master of, goswamis as, 150
master of, Krsna as, 300
purified, devotional service with, 262, 283,
285, 286-287, 300
of soul, 287
Service
as constitutional position of all, 2
to the Lord. See: Devotional service to the
Supreme Lord
misdirected, frustration from, 3
Sevaka-bhagavan defined, 59
Sex life
of animals, vs. of humans, 177
bodies by, 237
brahmacaris avoid, 68-69
chance, unwanted children from, 109
for grhamedhis, 44
of hogs, 238
illicit, 15, 68-69
illicit, defined, 63
material activities based on, 256
pregnancy from, depends on soul, 49
real, vs. illusory, 21
religious, vs. material, 108-109
restriction of, austerity of, 68-69
spiritual, 283-284
Shirt and coat & material body, analogy of,
66-67
Siddhis. See: Mystic powers
Siksa defined, 143
Siksdstaka
quoted on chanting Hare Krsna, 98, 143
Index

Siksdstaka
quoted on cleansing heart by chanting, 153,
271, 272, 274
quoted on Lord’s names as absolute, though
countless, 117
quoted on sankirtana, benefits of, 149
quoted on sankirtana as glorious, 157
quoted on world as blazing fire, 153
Sin
atheism as excuse for, 24
atonement for, types & degrees of, 251
body attained due to, 137
meat eating as, 122-124
types of, in four degrees, 249
witnesses to, 249
See also: Regulative principles
Sindhu River, 105
Singh, Dr. Thoudam Damodar, & Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, conversation between, 212-228
Siva, Sankaracarya as, 86, 88
Six Goswamis. See: Goswamis, Six
Slaughterhouses
animals in, ignorant of death, 43
‘*Christians’” build, 11
as uncivilized, 13
See also: Animal killing
Smoking. See: Regulative principles
Smrti & Sruti, 98-99
Soce tato vimukha-cetasa indriydrthaverse quoted, 245
Society, divisions in. See: Varndsrama system
Society, human. See: Civilization; Human
beings; Human life
Soldier killing & devotee eating, analogy of,
116-117
Son who murdered, analogy of, 121
Soul
See also: Soul, conditioned
in all living entities, 125, 234-239
in animals, 32-33, 123-125
as attractive force, 21
as beautiful, 37
body entered by, at conception, 237
compared to driver of car, 159
compared to spark from fire, 50 .
doctor’s acceptance of, 47-48, 201
as eternal, 26, 75, 237, 239
existence of, scientific basis for, 25, 27-28,
31-34
in heart, 49

351

Soul

identity of, as Lord’s part & parcel, 64

as individual eternally, 239

knowledge about, importance of, 28, 50,
238-239

liberated, Krsna known by few, only, 22-23

liberation for. See: Liberation

living entity as, 25—26, 27-29, 30-33,
37-38, 66-67, 76, 158-159, 162-163,
212-213, 218, 234-238, 260, 267

as living force of body, 25, 28-29, 33, 49

nature of, 26, 28-29, 49-50, 75, 251

opulences of, six listed, 38

as part of Supreme Lord, 38

in plants, 124

as pleasure potency’s part & parcel, 301

power of, compared to poison’s power, 213

sage sees, in all, 235

scientists can’t see, 213

senses of, 287

size of, 50, 213, 235

vs. Supersoul, 129

Supreme, vs. living entity, 50

& Supreme Lord equal qualitatively, 38

transmigration of. See: Transmigration

Souls, conditioned

cheating welcomed by, 61-62, 68-69

compared to animal ignorant of slaughter,
143-144

compared to child in lap of strangers, 207

compared to child touching fire, 55

compared to criminal ignorant of law, 55

compared to diseased man, 26

compared to driver of car, 31

compared to drowning man, 281

compared to fish out of water, 61, 75

compared to prisoners, 22

compared to unattached finger, 278

conditions of living for, as modes of nature,
50

defects of, 239, 302

Lord unseen by, 270-271

reincarnation of. See: Transmigration

saved by spiritual master, 72

senses of, 287

spiritual awareness for, three stages of, 50

sufferings of. See: Suffering

& Supersoul. See: Supersoul

temporarily covered, 211

transmigration details of, 28-29

transmigration of. See: Transmigration
352 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Souls, conditioned (continued)
See also: Living entities
Soviet Union
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada in,
~ 194-211
cosmonaut of, 48
religion opposed by, 174
Vedic works in language of, 195
Space exploration, 226
Spark from fire, & soul, analogy of, 50
Speculation, material, as useless, 23, 29, 100,
280
Spirit
as invisible, 17
Supreme Lord as, 17
See also: Soul; Supreme Lord
Spiritual life
austerity necessary for, 68-69
beginnning of, as knowing identity, 66-67
from childhood, 178, 180
compared to candy for jaundice, 274
education in schools for, 66-67
families good for, two types of, 4-5
food in, 156-157
happiness in. See: Happiness
humans meant for, 156
ignorance of, 66
ignored by materialists, 41-45
Krsna consciousness movement for, 8
& materialism incompatible, 68-69
vs. material life, 156
as razor’s edge, 74
as real life, 7
restrictions in, 68-69
as selfless reciprocation, 290-291
seriousness required for, 62
as transcendental, 66
wealth with, 66, 169

See also: Devotional service to the Supreme

Lord; Krsna consciousness; Selfrealization
Spiritual master (guru)
of Arjuna, Krsna as, 58, 265-266
authenticity of, questioned, 61

as authority on devotional service, 282-283

of Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada. See:
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati

bogus, vs. bona fide, 11, 56-63, 66-69, 72,
264

Caitanya Mahaprabhu cited on, 63

Spiritual master (guru)

Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructed by, 153

choice of, 59

Christ, Jesus, as, 121

compared to boatman, 5

compared to gold, 63

compared to government officer, 16

compared to raincloud, 266-267

compared to telegram deliverer, 56

compassion of, 298

defined, 11

devotee directed by, 130

disciples of, 59

in disciplic succession, 55-57, 264

faith in, 73 |

for fashion not recommended, 57, 59

of Gaudiya Matha, 70

genuine, guru means, 63

genuine, vs. bogus, 11, 56-63, 66-69, 72,
264

as God never, 59, 63

immortality given by, 60

knowledge from, 54-55, 221

Krsna as, 221

of Krsna consciousness Society. See: Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada

lecture on, by Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada, 54-60

Lord’s words only repeated by, 57

mantras effective due to, 72

mission of, 71-72

obedience to, 282

obeyed by brahmacaris, 68-69

as one, 55-57, 71

as perfect disciple, 264

pleasing, pleases all, 300

as prabhupada, 59

preaching of, 298

qualifications of, 56, 57, 59, 60, 62-63, 72,
264, 298

represents Vyasadeva, 72

required, 71, 264, 265, 286

respected as much as God, 58-59, 71

satisfied anywhere, 299

as sum total of demigods, 71

Supersoul helps find, 67

surrender to, 58-59, 73

as universal, 71

as via medium to Krsna, 283

of Vyasadeva, 41
Index

Spiritual master (guru)
worshiped as much as Lord, 70
as worshiper God, 59
See also: Disciplic succession
Spiritual nature as self-effulgent, 8
Spiritual world
attaining to. See: Liberation
attainment of, by chanting om, 95
Buddhists couldn’t understand, 86
devotional service in, examples of, 280
greatness of, 135
incarnations from, 135
as light, 54
vs. material world, 7-8, 21, 84, 135
nature of, 7-8, 236-237
reflected as material world, 21
| scientists can’t reach, 21
Sraddha defined, 34
Sravanamdefined, 139
Sravanam kirtanam visnoh
quoted, 139, 145
Sri-bhdgavan uvaca
quoted, 56
Sri Caitanya-caritamrta. See: Caitanya-caritamrta
Sri-guru-pranama (om ajfiana prayers) , quotation from, 54
Sri Isopanisad, 92
quoted on knowledge & nescience, 99-100
quoted on Lord owning all & each having
quota, 166, 194, 240
quoted on Lord’s kingdom, 100
Srila Prabhupdada, Bhaktivedanta Swami. See:
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
Srimad-Bhdgavatam
See also: Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations
from
author of, Vydsadeva as, 40-41
cited on Caitanya Mahaprabhu as Krsna,
133
cited on incarnations of Lord, 136
cited on preacher’s qualities, 120
communism described in, 200
compared to nectarean fruit, 98
hearing of, 231
hellish planets described in, 243
incarnations listed in, 136
as kirtanam, glorification of Krsna, 98
Krsna’s opulence told in, 19
love of God taught by, 11-12
as Maha-Purana, 195

353

Srimad-Bhdagavatam
Narada Muni inspires, 41
quoted by Sankaracarya, 88
understanding, takes time, 68
as Vedanta-siitracommentary, 40-41
by Vydsadeva, 72
Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations from
on Absolute Truth’s three features, 114
on atonement, 251
on Bhdgavatamas nectarean fruit, 98, 195
on bodily parts compared to varndsrama
divisions, 198
on devotees, nothing lacking for, 183
on devotee’s compassion, 245
on devotional service, stages of development of, 231-232
on devotional service as uncheckable, 180
on first-class religion as unmotivated &
uninterrupted, 12
on hearing of & glorifying Lord as duty, 45
on hellish life, counteracting, 249
on hellish planets, 244, 248
on human life, value of, 76-77
on ignorance, four kinds of, 75
on intelligent desiring no sense gratification,
176
on Kali Age faulty but for chanting Hare
Krsna, 155
on Kali-yuga, symptoms of, 173
on Lord as cause of all, 264-265
on Lord glorified by poetry, 267
on mode of goodness, knowledge in, 157
on religious processes for each Age, 152
on sense gratification in any form of life, 177
on sense gratification for animals, not
humans, 154
on spiritual master’s greatness, 71
Srinivasa Acarya
quoted on scripture study by Six Goswamis,
295
quoted on Six Goswamis’ compassion,
248
Srivasa, 134
Srotavyah kirtitavyas ca
verse quoted, 45
Srotriyam brahma-nistham
quoted, 62, 264
Sruti & smrti, 98-99, 203
Sruti-smrti-puranddiverse quoted, 99, 203 —
354 THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Sruti-smrti-virodhah
quoted, 98, 99
Staal, Dr. J.F., & Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, correspondence between, 90-104
Standard of living, spiritual, vs. material, 7-8
Stena eva sah
quoted, 227
Sthane hrsikesa
quoted, 95
Strength, Lord has all, 19
Striyo vaisyds tatha stidras
verse quoted, 211
Stidras
defined, 109, 196, 197
in Kali Age, everyone born as, 197-198
occupation & education for, 186
See also: Varnasrama system
Sudurlabhah defined, 257
Sudurlabha mahatmas, 101
Suffering, 75
by bodily identification, 30-32
disobedience to Lord causes, 55
by forgetfulness, 41
ignorance causes, 55
Krsna consciousness relieves, 30-32
VS. spiritual enjoyment, 34
Spiritual master relieves, 266-267
See also: Miseries —
Suhrdam sarva-bhitanadm
quoted, 185
Suicide, neglecting spiritual life as, 5, 76
Sukadeva Goswami, 98
cited on grhasthas & grhamedhis, 43
father of. See: Vyasadeva
Pariksit Maharaja answered by, 40
quoted on atonement, 251
quoted on hearing of & glorifying Lord as
duty, 45
quoted on hellish life, counteracting,
248-249
quoted on Kali Age faulty but for chanting
Hare Krsna, 155
quoted on questions asked by liberated
souls, 40
Sukham aindriyakam daitya
verse quoted, 177
Sukrti defined, 276
Sun
energy of, 220
Krsna as, 220

Sun
Krsna as splendor of, 220
as Krsna’s eye, 220
Sun & Supersoul, analogy of, 129
Sun covered by fog or cloud, analogy of,
270-271
Suni caiva §vapake ca
verse quoted, 15, 234, 294
Sunlight & God realization, analogy of, 263
Sun purifying urine, analogy of, 116
Sun rising & revival of Krsna consciousness, —
analogy of, 209
Sun’s & moon’s light, Krsna as, 302
Superconsciousness, Lord’s consciousness as,
130
Supersoul
activities of, 129
in all, 129
as caitya-guru, 130
compared to sun, 129
defined, 91
desires reminded by, 297-298
meditation on, yoga as, 129
realization of, 299-300
sincere soul helped by, 231, 249-250, 267
vs. soul, 129
& spirit soul, relationship between, 95
Spiritual master sent by, 67, 267
as witness & friend, 129-130
Supreme Lord
See also: Krsna
abode of, 7-8, 54
as absolute, 114, 265
acceptance of. See: Supreme Lord, surrender to
as adhoksaja, 217
as all-pervading, 44
as apdpa-viddha, 116
association with, 279-280
association with, chanting as, 114
association with, as eternal in spiritual exzstence, 8
association with, value of, 114
beauty of, 175
belief in, 24, 108
belief in, argument for, 24
belief in, lack of. See: Atheism
belief in, as scientific, 25, 27, 32-34
as Bhagavan, 44
bhakti process only way to know and love, 13
Index 355

Supreme Lord Supreme Lord

body (spiritual) of, 83, 175

car of gold for, 16

as cause of all, 219-220

chanting about. See: Chanting

compared to factory owner, 20

compared to government, 27

compared to king, 44, 116

compared to manager of government, 24

compared to ocean, 277

compared to sun, 116, 270-271

consciousness of His, as superconsciousness, 130

contacted by chanting, 95

as controller of all, 27, 44, 194

Deity worship of, philosophy of, 16-17, 282

denial of, argument against, 24

denial of, by atheists. See: Atheism

denial of, by ignorance, 270-271, 279

denial of, Mayavada philosophy as, 107

denial of, as useless, 24, 250

description of, 175

devotees of. See: Devotees of the Supreme
Lord

disciplic succession from. See: Disciplic succession

effulgence of, as Brahman, 8

energies of. See: Energy

as eternal, the supreme, 274

as everything, 17

existence of, proof for, 24

faith in. See: Faith in God

as father of all, 22, 219

features of, three described, 91, 114

followers of. See: Devotees of the Supreme
Lord

food offered to. See: Prasdda

foods offerable to, 116-117, 163

form of, as transcendental, 83, 175

as fountainhead, 38

glorification about, by chanting. See: Chanting; Kirtana; Sankirtana

glorification about, as duty, 157

glorification about, by poetry, 267-268

glorification about, safety from, 246-247

guidance of. See: Spiritual master; Supersoul

as Hari, 44

hearing about, 11, 98, 287-288

hearing about, from right source, 140

hearing & chanting about, 45, 139-140, 145

identity of, 264-265
as impersonal. See: Impersonalism
impersonal aspect of, 91, 299-300
incarnations of
Buddha as, 106
Caitanya Mah4aprabhu as, evidence for,
133-136
colors of, in four Ages, 133
evidence for, 136
as Jesus Christ. See: Christ, Lord Jesus
missions of, two, 133-134
from spiritual world, 135
See also: names of individual incarnations
as iSvarah, 44
knowledge about
by ascending & descending processes,
216-217
in Bhagavad-gita by Lord Himself, 23
by chanting Hare Krsna, 142
by deductive & inductive processes,
216-217
by devotional service only, 13
Krsna consciousness movement for, 65
for liberated persons, 157
liberation by, 29, 240, 302
& love for Him as real religion, 11-12
mudhas haven’t, 138
as peace solution, 192
sinful cannot have, 123
value of, 167, 271, 276-277
knowledge of His, as unlimited, 221
Krsna as, pure love not dependent on, 292
Krsna best name for, 18
laws of, compared to government laws,
250
laws of, contraception against, 49
laws of, religion as, 34, 91, 149, 168,
174-175
laws of, as strict, 27, 44, 249, 250
vs. living entities, 50, 215, 277-278, 288
& living entities, similarities between, 38,
235-236, 277-278
living entity thinking himself as, 277-278
lotus feet of, 79
love for
Caitanya Mah4aprabhu gives highest,
138, 150
by devotional service only, 13
Krsna consciousness as, 180-181
356

Supreme Lord

~

love for
Krsna consciousness movement teaches,
96, 145
obedience required for, 114-115
pure, detailed, 279-291
sinful cannot have, 123, 181
Spiritual master required for, 286
sankirtana for, 139
as religion’s aim, 169
maintains all, 275-276
mystic power of, 214-215
names of
as absolute, 112-113, 117, 118
activities determine, 18, 20
chanting. See: Chanting
Christos & Krsnaas, 112
examples of, several listed, 18
God as, 112
Krsna as best, 18, 20
‘‘none for,’’ meaning of, 18
in relationship with His devotees, 18
as unlimited, 114
See also: individual names of Lord
obedience to. See: Supreme Lord, laws of
as omnipotent, 19
opulences of, all-attractive, 44
opulences of, detailed, 19-20
opulences of, listed, 19, 38, 114
as Paramatma. See: Supersoul
pastimes of, beauty unseen in, by foolish, 38
pastimes of, with devotees. See: Supreme
Lord, relationships with
as personal, 78-79, 91, 106-107, 239
preaching about. See: Preaching of Krsna
consciousness; Sankirtana
as proprietor of all, 227, 240-241
as renounced, 19, 20, 38, 114
realizing Him. See: Supreme Lord, knowledge about
relationships with, conjugal, 283-284
relationships with, knowledge of, 270
relationships with, varieties of, examples of,
284-285

religion from, only, 34, 91, 149, 174-175, 190

represented by spiritual master, 63
respected by respecting spiritual master, 58
as sarvatmd (Supersoul), 44

satisfying, satisfies everyone, 183

seeing Him, covered entities not, 270-271

THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Supreme Lord
seeing Him, in different ways, 3
seeing Him, everywhere, 239-240, 302
seeing Him, Soviet cosmonaut not, 48 |
service to. See: Devotional service to the
Supreme Lord
social life of, 302
soul’s relation to. See: Living entity; Soul
as spirit in Deity form, 16
spiritual master as, never, 63
Spiritual master respected as much as, 16,
70, 71
as Supersoul. See: Supersoul
supreme characteristics of, 264-265
as supreme eternal, 274
as supreme living force, 236
surrender to, 138
by detachment, 6
immediate, as possible, 68
by knowledge, 100
liberation by, 274
as rare, 68, 100
required, 206-208
technique of, 247-248
through spiritual master, 58, 59, 73
teacher of, 264-265
as transcendental, 83
understanding Him. See: Supreme Lord,
knowledge about
as unlimited, 19
Vedas first from, 72
as witness, 249-250
as worshipable God, 59
worshipers of. See: Devotees of the
Supreme Lord
worship of, at home, 134
worship of Krsna as highest worship of, 282
See also: Caitanya Mahaprabhu
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Absolute
Truth as, 91
Surrender
by all, to someone, 206-207
by Arjuna to Krsna, 58
as Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught, 138
immediate, as possible, 68
knowledge for, 73
Krsna calls for, 58, 65
to Krsna, Sankaracarya teaches, 89
Krsna taught, 138
to Lord through spiritual master, 58-59
Index

Surrender
protection by, 58, 65
as rarely wanted, 68
to spiritual master required, 58-59
with submission & service, 59
Susukham defined, 132
Svarat defined, 265
Svetasvatara Upanisad, quotations from
on faith in Lord and spiritual master, 73
on Lord’s energies, 271
on soul and Supersoul (‘‘two birds’’
analogy), 95
Swami defined, 150
Syamdc chavalam prapadye

quoted, 78
T
Tad aham bhakty-upahrtam
verse quoted, 116
Tadatmanam srjamy aham
quoted, 149
Tad viddhi pranipatena

quoted, 202, 217
verse quoted, 59, 73
Tad-vijnanartham sa gurum evabhigacchet
quoted, 263, 265
verse quoted, 55, 71
Tad visnoh paramam padam
quoted, 149
Tal labhyate duhkhavad anyatah sukham
verse quoted, 176
Tamas defined, 54
Tam tam niyamam asthadya
verse quoted, 107
Tapasya. See: Austerity
Tasam brahma mahad yonir
verse quoted, 22, 219
Tasmdd bharata sarvatma
verse quoted, 45
Tasmat puraivasy iha padpa-niskrtau
verse quoted, 251
Tasyaite kathita hy arthah
verse quoted, 73
Tasyaiva hetoh prayateta kovidah
quoted, 180
verse quoted, 176
Tatas canudinam dharmah
verse quoted, 173

357

Tathd dehantara-praptir
quoted, 212
verse quoted, 201
Tathd Sarirani vihaya jirnany
verse quoted, 235
Tato mam tattvato jnatva
quoted, 240
Tat-paratvena nirmalam
quoted, 64
Teachings of Lord Caitanya, 294
cited on chanting, 95
cited on PrakaSadnanda Sarasvati, 151-152
Telegram deliverer & guru, analogy of, 56
Tena tyaktena bhunijithah
quoted, 194
verse quoted, 240
Theories of cosmic manifestation, 6
Times of India, reference to, 36
Timira defined, 54
Titiksad defined, 120
Tolstoy, quote from, 174
Tompkins Square Park, 67, 151
Toronto General Hospital, 47
Train-car companions, analogy of, 45
Train coach, unmoving, & contemporary
civilization, analogy of, 5
Train starting & creation, analogy of, 219
Transcendence. See: Krsna consciousness;
Liberation; Spiritual world
Transcendentalists. See: Devotees of the
Supreme Lord; Impersonalists; Yogis
‘Transcendental meditation,’ 160
Transcendental sound. See: Chanting
Transmigration, 301
to animal body, 4, 29, 42, 125, 137
beginning of, 50
between bodies & planets, 244
compared to aging, 25, 200-201, 212
compared to air carrying fragrance, 28
compared to changing clothes, 28, 49, 234,
235
defined, 49
detailed, 28-29, 159-160
for devotional service, continuation of, 4:
evolutionary cycle of, 3, 224, 236, 275
freedom from. See: Liberation
to humart species, 159
Krsna explains, 200-201
modes determine, 42-43
scientific & logical basis of, 25-33
358

Transmigration (continued)

See also: Birth; Death |
Tree, living and dead, analogy of, 213-214
Trees

birth as, 141

sun’s energy stored by, 220

varieties of, 222
Treta-yuga, 142
Tri-kaladau defined, 199
Trinity, Christian, 112-113
Truth

relative, ‘‘liquid beauty’’ example of, 37-38

relative, material literature as, 38

vs. untruth, 36

See also: Absolute Truth; Knowledge
‘‘Truth and Beauty,”’ story of, 36-37
Turnam yateta na pated anumrtyu yavan

verse quoted, 76-77
Tuste ca tatra kim alabhyam ananta adye

quoted, 183
Tyaktva deham punar janma

verse quoted, 29, 253, 261

U

United Animals, analogy of, 174
United States of America. See: America, United
States of
Universe, 6, 219, 224-225
University of California at Berkeley, 90
University of Moscow, 194
University of Nairobi, address by Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, 234-242
Upadeksyanti te jndnam
verse quoted, 59, 73
Upanisads, 84, 88, 89
quoted on God’s kingdom, nature of, 8
Uttisthata jagrata
verse quoted, 74

V

Vacaspati Misra, quoted on Sruti & smrti, 97, 98,
99
Vadanti tat tattva-vidas
verse quoted, 114
Vaikuntha. See. Spiritual world

Cd

THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

Vairagya defined, 20
Vaisnavas. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord;

Pure devotees

Vaisyas defined, 196, 197

See also: Varnasrama system

Vande rtipa-sanatanau raghu-yugau Sri-jiva
gopalakau
quoted, 295

Varna-sarnkara defined, 109
Varnas defined, 105
Varnasramacaravata purusena parah puman

quoted, 197

Varnasrama system, 186-189, 191

vs. caste system of today, 106, 109-110

compared to organization of bodily parts,
188, 197, 198

created by Lord, 14, 196-197, 206

details & history of, 105, 196-199, 205-206

divisions in, listed, 178-179

Krsna consciousness movement to
establish, 106

perversion of, 106

Puranas describe, 105

by quality, not birth, 206

value of, 109-110

Varuna, 88, 145
Vasamsi jirnani yatha vihaya

verse quoted, 235

Vasudevah sarvam iti

verse quoted, 100, 207, 256

Vasudeva-nandana defined, 18
Vasudeva’s son, Krsna as, 18, 85
Vayu defined, 218

Vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

quoted, 98
verse quoted, 203

Vedanta as difficult to understand, 153
Vedanta-krt, Krsna as, 99
Vedanta-sravanam pranava-japas ca

quoted, 97, 99

Vedanta-siitra

author of, 41
beginning verse of, 41
commentary on, Srimad-Bhdgavatamas,
40-41
quoted on Absolute Truth, inquiry on, 156
quoted on inquiring about Brahman, 39, 41, 42
quoted on scriptures, 97
quoted on sound, spiritual, 95
as Sdriraka-sutras, 40-41
Index

Vedas
author of, 72
as authority, 202-203
Buddha rejected, 106
chanting authorized by, references given,
94-95
cited on omkara, 94
defined, 203
disciplic succession for, 72
Krsna as goal of, 89, 95, 98
Krsna as source & goal of (Sanskrit only) ,203
See also: Vedic literature
Veda-vada-rata defined, 99-99n
Veda-vid, Krsna as, 99
Vede ramayane caiva harih sarvatra giyate
quoted, 98
Vedic culture
vs. Buddhism, 106
divisions of life in. See: Varndsrama system
Vedic literature
as authorized, 135-136
a benefit for modern society, 50
compared to law references, 135-136
translated into Russian, 195
See also: Bhagavad-gita; Bhagavat-gita As It
Is; Srimad-Bhdgavatam; Vedantasutra; Vedas; and others by name
Vegetarianism, 116-117
of Krsna & His devotees, 163
See also: Food, for human beings; Meat
eating
Venum kvanantam aravinda-dalayataksam
verse quoted, 175
Vidya defined, 100
Vidyam cavidyam ca yas
verse quoted, 99
Vidya- vinaya-sampanne
verse quoted, 15, 234, 294
Vikarna, 87
Virya defined, 246
Visnu
See also: Supreme Lord
as Krsna, 89
symbols of, four, 134
Visnu Purana
quoted on opulences of Lord, 19
quoted on varndsrama system, 197
Visnu-yasa, 136
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura, quotations
from, on spiritual master 
359

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura, quotations
from, on spiritual master
as confidential to Lord, 59
honored as much as Lord, 58, 59, 70
Krsna’s benediction by mercy of, 58
on raincloud-mercy of, 266
Visva-vaisnava Raja-sabha, 70
Vraja-jana-vallabha giri-vara-dhari
quoted, 292
Vraja-vasis defined, 292
Vrndavana
Krsna saved, 293
residents of, 292-293, 301
Vyasadeva
authored Vedic literatures, 40-41, 56, 72,
225
in disciplic succession, 56, 72
father of, 19 :
with Pariksit Maharaja, 40
prayer to, 82
spiritual master of, 41
spiritual master represents, 72
surrender to, required, 73
Vyasa-pija to Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, 70-80
Vyavasayatmika buddhih
verse quoted, 107, 169

Ww

War, 242
Water, Krsna as taste of, 239, 302
Water filtering & cleansing consciousness,
analogy of, 13
Watering root & devotional service to the
Supreme Lord, analogy of, 3
Wealth
Krsna sanctions, 297-298
of Lord, 19
of spiritual master, 66
as Spiritual obstacle possibly, 169
unimportant in spiritual life, 66
See also: Materialism
Wheeler, Howard, 205
Women, 15
attractive force in, as soul, 21
illusory beauty of, 37-38
“Women’s liberation,”’ 15
Work
life meant for more than, 4
360

Work (continued)

in Lord’s service. See: Devotional service to

the Supreme Lord
Workers. See: Stidras; Varndsrama system
World, material. See: Material world
World, spiritual. See: Spiritual world

Y

Yac candramasi yac cagnau
verse quoted, 220
Yac chreyah syan niscitam brithi tan me
verse quoted, 58, 266
Yad aditya-gatam tejo
verse quoted, 220
Yada yada hi dharmasya
verse quoted, 149
Yad gatva na nivartante
verse quoted, 54
Yadi sloko ‘pi pramanam
quoted, 102
Yad yad acarati Sresthas
verse quoted, 184, 241-242
Yah sa sarvesu bhiitesu
verse quoted, 21, 236
Yajna-sistasinah santo
verse quoted, 117
Yamaraja, 144
Yamuna, 293
Yamuna-tira-vana-cari
quoted, 293
Yasmin vijndte sarvam evam vijnatam bhavati
quoted, 220, 226
Yasoda-nandana defined, 18, 293
Yasoda-nandana vraja-jana-ranjana
quoted, 293

THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION

YaSoda’s son, Krsna known as, 18, 293
Yasya deve para bhaktir
verse quoted, 73
Yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasaddah
quoted, 58
Yasyatma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke
verse quoted, 75
Yatatam api siddhanam
verse quoted, 22
Yathecchasi tatha kuru
quoted, 250
Yat-tirtha-buddhih salile na karhicij
verse quoted, 75
Yei krsna-tattva-vetta, sei ‘guru’ haya
quoted, 205
Yoga
bhakti-yoga. See: Devotional service to the
Supreme Lord
breathing exercises of, as basics, 131
chanting Hare Krsna as, 131-132
as difficult, 272
impersonal, as difficult, 129
meaning of, 128, 129
mystic powers of. See: Mystic powers
real, vs. bogus, 128
restrictions in, 69, 128
without bhakti, Lord unknown by, 13
Yoga-yukto visuddhatma
quoted, 257
Yogesvara defined, 95
Yogis
defined, 12
Krsna as goal of, 89
Yudhisthira Maharaja, 200
quoted on death, ignorance of, 144
Yugas. See: Ages, four; individual names of Ages
Yuktahara-vihdrasya
quoted, 156
 

THE SGIENGE OF

OELF

BALIZATIO

In this book you will discover the timeless
science that great teachers have spoken for
millennia. THE SCIENCE OF SELF-REALIZATION
opens up the secrets of the self within, nature and the universe, and the Supreme Self
within and without.

  

Here the world’s most distinguished teacher
of the science of self-realization talks about
meditating and practicing yoga in the modern age, gaining liberation from the law
of karma, achieving superconsciousness, and
much more.

In all the interviews, lectures, essays, and letters chosen for this special book, His Divine
Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada speaks with startling clarity and power.
He proves just how relevant the science of
self-realization is to today’s world and your
own life.
