IEACHINGS He

 

A.C. BHAKTIVEDANTA SWAMI
 

A.C. BHAKTIVEDANTA
. SWAMI

ISKCON
85.95

In the Kali Yuga the Supreme Lord comes as One Who
always chants the Holy Name of Sri Krishna, Who is Sri
Krishna Himself, Whose complexion is yellow.

—Srimad Bhagwatam (X1:5:32)

These words of the massive Srimad Bhagwatam, recorded
by the author of the famous Bhagavad-Gita, Vyasadev,
foretell the advent of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Lord
Chaitanya, like Christ, was a spiritual revolutionary Who
taught that conceptions of being Hindu, Christian,
Muslim, black, white, male and female are “bodily
designations that are finished when the body is finished.”
His Peace Formula is this: all living entities, including
trees, bacteria, ants, cows and humans are eternal spiritual
sparks of the Supreme Lord and all are brothers who have
the same One Father. In Teachings of Lord Chaitanya,
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami presents to the West the
sublime life and teachings of this great transcendental
Personality of the 15th century Whose Sankirtan Movement swept first India, and now the West.

Many philosophers recognise God to be a force that is
beyond name or form, but Chaitanya Mahaprabhu taught
that God is a Person Who has Form, Qualities, Name
and Pastimes—but Who is nevertheless Absolute and
Transcendental and beyond anything we have experienced
in this material world.

Lord Chaitanya journeyed up and down the subcontinent of India to deliver the easiest, most glorious
method of self-realisation: chanting of the Hare Krishna
Mantra. His explanations of the esoteric Vedanta Sutra
converted many impersonalists, turning them “from
dried sticks into blooming flowers.” He led thousands
in massive Kirtan parades of ecstacy, and even caused
tigers in the jungles to swoon.

Teachings of Lord Chaitanya is a remarkable book which
answers definitively the unanswered questions burning
within man’s heart. The Swamiji’s chapter entitled “The
Beauty of Krishna” is a description of the stunning beauty
of God which stands by itself as one of the most sublime
lyrical achievements in all mystic literature. His vast
scholarship qualifies him as the most erudite Vedic scholar
now writing in English. As Acharya (meaning one who
teaches by example) of the Sankirtan Movement today,
the Swami lectures at numerous temples and writes out
of his daily experiences with the authority of a master,
so that his books are both learned and practical, instructive
as well as deeply moving. To read A. C. Bhaktivedanta
Swami's books is to understand that here is one who
knows the Absolute Truth, one who can teach It per
fectly.

Jacket painting/Jadurani
Photo/Gurudas

The International Society for Krishna Consciousness
61 Second Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10003
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

AX, 1, Oo ae TY f= Poa. (WTA
SWANL "

 

 
TEACHINGS OF
LORD CHAITANYA
OTHER BOOKS BY A.C. BHAKTIVEDANTA SWAMI

Bhagavad Gita As It Is

Srimad Bhagwatam

Easy Journey to Other Planets
Ishopanishad

Brahma Samhita

Nectar of Devotion

Back To Godhead Magazine (Editor)
TEACHINGS
of
LORD CHAITANYA

A TREATISE ON FACTUAL SPIRITUAL LIFE

 

BY

A.C. BHAKTIVEDANTA SWAMI

Acharya: International Society for Krishna Consciousness

Published by:
International Society for Krishna Consciousness
Branches Throughout the World

Headquarters: 61 Second Avenue
New York City, N.Y. 10003
U.S.A,
Copyright © 1968 International Society for Krishna Consciousness Inc.
(ISKCON)

Library of Congress Catalogue Card Number: 68-29320
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
FIRST EDITION

The Prologue is reprinted from
Chaitanya—His Life and Precepts
by Snla Thakur Bhaktivinode
Calcutta, India (1895)

Readers interested in the subject matter of this
book are invited by the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness to correspond with its Secretary.

 

12/14 Point Bembo Typeface
Printed by Dai Nippon Printing Co., Ltd.
Tokyo, Japan
 

Namah om vishnu padaya krishna presthaya bhutale
Srimate bhaktivedanta swamin iti namine

We offer our respectful obeisances to Bhaktivedanta Swami
Who is so dear unto Krishna on this earth due to His
taking shelter unto the Lord’s Lotus Feet.

We prostrate ourselves at the Lotus Feet of our Beloved Spiritual Master and
offer this treasured book to His Divine Grace on our bowed heads. We came to Him
looking for broken pieces of glass, and He has bestowed upon us a priceless gem.
He has opened our eyes, which were blinded by the darkness of atheism, mental
speculation, and sense gratification, to the glorious light of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. His transcendental words are seeds which in our hearts have bloomed into
the perfection of human life—the discovery that God lives and that we can live with
Him—Krishna Consciousness.

The Publishers
 

DEDICATED TO

The Sacred Service

of

SRILA SACHCHIDANANDA BHAKTIVINODE THAKUR

Who Initiated The Teachings of Lord Chaitanya
in
The Western World
(McGill University, Canada)
in 1896
The Year Of My Birth

A, C. BHAKTIVEDANTA SWAMI
ea
 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

My thankful acknowledgement is due to Sriman Brahmananda Brahmachary
(Mr. Bruce Scharf), Sriman Gargamuni Brahmachary (Mr. Gregory Scharf) and
Sriman Satyabrata Brahmachary (Mr. Stanley Moskowitz) for their financial help
for this publication, and I beg to thank Sriman Rayarama Brahmachary (Mr.
Raymond Marais), Sriman Satsvarupa Brahmachary (Mr. Stephen Guarino) and
Sriman Madhusudan Brahmachary (Mr. Michael Blumert) for editing and typing
the manuscript, and Sriman Goursundar Das Adhikary (Mr. Gary McElroy) and his
good wife, Srimati Govinda Dasi (Mrs. Bonnie McElroy) who are always engaged
to see to my personal comforts and Iam so much obliged to them for their drawing
all the nice pictures contained in this great publication.

All glories to the devotees engaged in the matter of Krishna Consciousness. I am
sure that Lord Sri Krishna Chaitanya Mahaprabhu will bestow His Causeless Mercy

upon everyone who is engaged in pushing the cause of Krishna Consciousness.

A.C.B
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Tllustrations 0... ce ec cc cc ccc cc ce cece cece cece ee eee cece eeeeens XII
The Author ... 0... ccc ccc cc cc ce cc cece cece cece eee cece eeeeeee XII
Preface... ccc ccc cc cc ce ce cee cece ee eee cece ence eee ce eeeeeeeeees XV
2 0) C04 on XXVII
Lord Chaitanya’s Mission ........... eee eee cece eee eee c eee eee eens XXXVII
Introduction 1... 0... ccc ccc cc cc cee ccc ce cece eee cece eee eeeeeeeeee I

PART I

I Teachings to Rupa Goswami ..... 6. eee eee eee ee eee eens 21

II Sanatan Goswami ...... ccc ccc ccc ccc cece eee eee e cease 39
III Teachings to Sanatan Goswami ......... eee eee eee ee eee 47
IV The Wise Man ..... ccc ee ccc cc ccc ce cece cece cee c ee eeeees 52
V_ How to Approach God ...... 5... eee e eee cece eee eee eee eens 57
VI His Forms are One and the Same.............. 0. cece eee eens 63
VII Unlimited Forms of Godhead ........ 0... ccc ccc ce ce eens 67
VII The Avataras ..... cece cc ccc cc cece cee cect eeeeeeeees 73
IX The Opulences of Krishna .......... 0.0... eee eee eee eee ee eee eee 82
X The Beauty of Krishna ............. cece eee eee ee eee eee ees 90
XI Service to the Lord ... 2... ee ee ccc ecw cece cece ee eee 96
XII The Devotee 2... ccc cece cence ecu uceuueuueeeueenveuues ~.- I04
XIII Devotional Service in Attachment ........... 0.0... cece cee eee 113
XIV The Ecstacy of the Lord and His Devotees ....................-- I2I
XV_ Explanation of the Atmarama Verse in Srimad Bhagwatam .......... 131

XVI Conclusion of Teachings to Sanatan Goswami ...............66- 140
XVII
XVIII
XIX
XX
XXI
XXII
XXIII
XXIV
XXV
XXVI
XXVII
XXVIII
XXIX
XXX
XXXI
XXXII

PART II

Lord Chaitanya, the Original Personality of Godhead ............ 157
The Conversations with Prakasananda  .............ccceceeeees 165
The Goal of Vedanta Study ........... cece cece e eee eee eens 175
The Mayavadi Philosophers are Converted .................--- 183
Further Talks with Prakasananda ......... 0... .c cece ccc ee cee eees 192
The Srimad Bhagwatam 1.1.0... cece cece eee eee eee neers 200
Why Study the Vedanta Sutra? .... 0... ccc ccc eee cece ees 206
Talks with Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya ...............222eeeee- 222
Personal and Impersonal Realization ................-- eee eee 228
Bhattacharya is Converted ......... 2... e eee e cece eee eee e ee eeee 234
Lord Chaitanya and Ramananda Roy ..........---e eee eee eee 243
Relationship with the Supreme Lord ................ 02 ee ee wees 248
The Transcendental Pastimes of Radha and Krishna.............. 254
Pure Love for Krishna .......... ccc ccc ce cece cece cence ences 260
The Supreme Perfection .......... cece eee eee ee eee eee eeee 266
Conclusion ....... cc cece cece cc cece cece cece cece eee eeeecnees 284
. —

  

  

‘7
—— Ya’): ;
=i 7 =
aM =
Paes | (oo

ILLUSTRATIONS

Page
Sri Srimad A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami ............... eee e eee eee eee eens XXI
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Goswami Maharaj..............-...-4-- XXII
Srila Gour Kisore Das Babaji Maharaj...............e cece cece eee cece XXIII
Srila Thakur Bhaktivinode .......... cece cece eee eee eee eee eens XXIV
Sti Pancha Tattva ...... cece eee cece eee ence eee eee e eee eeees XXV
Sridhama Mayapur.......... cece cece cece cece eee e eee e eee eeee XXVI
Rupa Goswami and His Younger Brother Anupam (Ballabha)
Meeting Lord Chaitanya at Prayag (Allahabad) ......................20005- 21
Sanatan Goswamis Resignation from the Government Service
of Nawab Hussin Shah of Bengal (15th Century) .................0 eee eee 40
Lord Chaitanya Fainting in the Temple of Lord Jagannath .................. 122
Lord Chaitanya Meets Prakasananda Saraswati at Benares............----+---- 166

Ramananda Roy Talking on High Level Krishna Consciousness
with Lord Chaitanya ..... 2... cece cece cece eect e eee eee e eee eee eeees 242
 

The Author

A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami was born Abhay Charan De on September 1, 1896
in Calcutta. In 1920 he finished his education, majoring in philosophy, English, and
economics, at the University of Calcutta. Because of his involvement in Gandhi's
national non-cooperation movement, however, he rejected any formal diploma.
Soon afterward Abhay Charan De took up the duties of manager of a large chemical
concern. Then, in 1922, he met His Divine Grace Sri Srimad Bhakti Siddhanta
Saraswati Goswami Maharaj, the founder of 64 Goudiya Vaishnava Maths in India,
Berlin, and London. His Divine Grace liked this educated young man and injected
in him the idea of preaching Lord Chaitanya’s message all over the world.

At Allahabad in 1933, Abhay Charan De was formally initiated, and in 1936,
just days before His Divine Grace’s departure from this mortal world, he was specifically ordered to spread Krishna Consciousness in the English language and to the
West.

Thus, Back To Godhead magazine was started in 1944 with Abhay Charan De
serving as editor-in-chief. Back To Godhead is now being published monthly in
America by his American disciples.

The Goudiya Vaishnava Society recognised him as BHAKTIVEDANTA in
1947. In 1954 he became Vanaprastha, retired from family life. In 1959 he took
Sannyasa, the renounced order of spiritual life and is now known as A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami.

In September 1965, at the advanced age of 70, A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
arrived in New York City to fulfil his master’s sacred mission. Immediately, young
Americans were attracted to him, and in July 1966, the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness was formally incorporated.

A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami is the author of the remarkable Bhagavad-Gita As It Is,
published in 1968 by the Macmillan Company. Presently he is working on his
masterpiece, a projected 60 volume work of translation and elaborate commentary
of the Srimad Bhagwatam, three volumes of which have already been published. He
has also recorded a unique 33 1/3 r.p.m. record album of the mystical mantra HARE
KRISHNA, entitled “Krishna Consciousness,” which has met with extraordinary
popularity in India and America.
 

PREFACE

There is no difference between the teachings of Lord Chaitanya presented here
and the teachings of Lord Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita. The teaching of Lord
Chaitanya is a practical demonstration of the teaching of Lord Krishna. In the
Bhagavad Gita the last word of the Lord is that everyone should surrender unto Him,
Lord Krishna, and that He will take immediate charge of such a surrendered soul.
The Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is already in charge of the maintenance of this Creation by His plenary expansion as Kshirodakashayee Vishnu. But
such maintenance by the Lord is not specific. When, therefore, the Lord takes charge,
it means that He takes particular charge of a pure devotee. A pure devotee is a soul
ever surrendered to the Lord, like a child to his parents or an animal to its master.
This surrendering process is manifested in six different stages, namely: (1) to accept
things favorable for discharging devotional service, (2) to reject things unfavorable
for discharging devotional service, (3) to believe firmly that the Lord will protect
His devotee always, (4) to feel exclusively dependent on the Mercy of the Lord,
(5) to have no separate interest besides the interest of the Lord, and (6) always to feel
oneself meek and humble.

XV
XVI Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Therefore Lord Krishna demanded that one should surrender unto Him through
the above-mentioned six phases of the surrendering process; but the less intelligent
class of men and so-called scholars of the world misunderstood these demands of the
Lord, and thus misguided the general mass of people to reject them. In the Bhagavad
Gita, at the end of the Ninth Chapter, the Lord directly orders one to always think
of Him, become His devotee, worship Him only, offer obeisances unto Him only—
and by doing so one is sure to come to Him in His Transcendental Abode. But
so-called scholarly demons misguide the mass of people, directing them not to
surrender like that to the Personality of Godhead, but rather to the impersonal,
non-manifested, eternal, unborn Truth. The Mayavadi, impersonalist, philosophers
do not accept that the last word in the matter of understanding the Absolute Truth
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one desires to understand the Sun as he is,
one faces first of all the sunshine, and then the Sun globe, and at last if one is able to
enter into that globe, there is the possibility of seeing face-to-face the predominating
Deity of the Sun. The Mayavadi philosophers, due to a poor fund of knowledge,
cannot go beyond the Brahman effulgence which is like the sunshine. The Upanishads
confirm that one has to penetrate the dazzling effulgence of Brahman, and then one
can see the real Face of the Personality of Godhead.

Lord Chaitanya therefore teaches us directly that one has to worship Lord
Krishna, Who appeared as the foster Child of the King of Braja. He also recommends
that the place known as Vrindaban is as good as Lord Krishna because, Lord Krishna
being the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, there is no difference between
His Name, Quality, Form, Pastimes, Entourage, and Paraphernalia.

Lord Chaitanya also recommended that the mode of worshipping the Lord in
the highest perfectional stage is the method of worship conceived by the Damsels of
Braja. The Damsels of Braja, the Gopis, simply loved Krishna without any motive
for material or spiritual gain. He also recommended that Srimad Bhagwatam is the
spotless narration of transcendental knowledge and that the highest gain in the
human form of life is to develop unalloyed love of Krishna, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.

Lord Chaitanya’s teachings are exactly the same as those given by Lord Kapila,
the original propounder of the Samkhya Yoga, or the Samkhya system of philosophy.
This authorized system of Yoga is practiced on the principle of meditation on the
Transcendental Form of the Lord. There is no meditating on something Void or
impersonal involved. When one is practiced to meditate upon the Transcendental
Form of Lord Vishnu, even without the sitting posture in a particular place and
atmosphere, the stage is called perfect Samadhi. This perfect Samadhi of Samkhya Yoga
is confirmed in the Bhagavad Gita at the end of the Sixth Chapter, where the Lord
says that of all the yogis, one who constantly thinks of the Lord within the core of
his heart with love and devotion is the greatest.

Lord Chaitanya instructed this Samkhya Yoga, or system of philosophy—called
Preface XVII

Achintya Bhedabheda Tattwa (simultaneously one and different)—most practically for
everyone among the mass of people, simply by chanting the Holy Name of the Lord.
He says that the Holy Name of the Lord is the Sound Vibration Form of the Lord.
The Lord being the Absolute Whole, there is no difference between His Holy Name
and His Transcendental Form. Therefore, by chanting the Holy Name of the Lord,
one can directly associate with the Supreme Lord by Sound Vibration. This Sound
Vibration of the Lord has three stages of development, namely: (1) offensive stage,
(2) clearing stage, and (3) transcendental stage. In the offensive stage one may desire
all kinds of material happiness or distress as one acts, but in the second stage of
chanting, one becomes cleared from all material contamination. But when one is
situated on the transcendental stage, one achieves the most covetable perfection, the
stage of loving God. Lord Chaitanya recommended that this is the highest stage of
perfection for the human being.

Yoga practice is essentially meant for controlling the senses. Mind is the central
controlling factor of all senses; and therefore one has to practice first controlling the
mind by engaging the mind in the matter of Krishna Consciousness. The gross
activities of the mind are expressed through the external senses, either for acquiring
knowledge or functioning under the will, and the subtle activities of the mind are
thinking, feeling, and willing, according to the different attitudes of consciousness.
This consciousness is either polluted or clear. If the mind is fixed up in Krishna
(His Name, Quality, Form, Pastimes, Entourage, and Paraphernalia), then the whole
of the activities, subtle and gross, is changed favorably. The Bhagavad Gita’s process
of purifying consciousness is to fix the mind on Krishna—to talk of His Transcendental Activities, to cleanse the Temple of the Lord, to walk to the Temple of the
Lord, to see the Beautiful Transcendental Form of the Lord nicely decorated, to hear
His Transcendental Glories, to taste foodstuffs offered to the Lord, to smell the
flowers and Tulsi leaves offered to the Lord, to associate with the Lord’s devotees,
to engage oneself in the activities for the interest of the Lord, and to become angry
also at those who are envious of the devotees. No one can stop the activities of the
mind or the senses, but one can purify such activities by changing the account. This
change of account is recommended in the Bhagavad Gita (Chapter II/39). A human
being is sometimes restricted in the matter of sense-gratification under certain circumstances of disease, etc. But that prescription or regulative principle is for the less
intelligent class of men. Such less intelligent men, without knowing the actual process
of controlling the mind and senses, either want to stop them by force, or to give them
up or to be carried away by the waves of sense-gratification.

The eight formulas of practicing Yoga—regulative principles, following the rules,
practicing the different sitting postures, breathing exercise, and thus to withdraw the
senses from the sense objects, etc.—are meant for the persons who are too engrossed
in the bodily concept of life. But the intelligent man who is situated in Krishna
Consciousness, does not forcibly stop his senses from acting on behalf of Krishna.
XVIII Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

You cannot stop a child from his playful activities and leave him inactive, but
you can stop him by engaging him in superior activities. Similarly, the forceful
restraint of the sense activities, by following the eight principles of Yoga practice,
is recommended for an inferior class of men; but the superior class of men, being
engaged in the better activities of Krishna Consciousness, naturally retire from the
inferior activities of material existence.

Lord Chaitanya in this way teaches us the science of Krishna Consciousness, which
is absolute. Dry mental speculators try to restrain themselves from material attachment, but it is generally found that the mind, being too strong to be controlled,
sometimes drags such speculators down in the matter of sensual activities; but there
is no such chance for persons in Krishna Consciousness. Therefore, one has to engage
one’s mind and senses in Krishna conscious activities, and how this is practically
possible is taught by the Lord, Sri Krishna Chaitanya.

Before His acceptance of the Sannyas, or renounced order of life, Lord Chaitanya
was known as Viswambhar. Vistwwambhar means the one who maintains the whole
Universe as leader of all living entities. The very same maintainer and leader of all
living entities appeared as Lord Sri Krishna Chaitanya to give us the sublime teachings
of life, and was the ideal Teacher of the prime necessities of life. He is the most
munificent Giver of the love of Krishna. He is the complete Reservoir of all mercies
and auspiciousness. Although He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna,
as is confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Bhagavad Gita, Mahabharata and Upanishads,
He appeared as worshipable by everyone in this age of disagreement. Everyone can
join in His Samkirtan movement without any previous qualification, and everyone
can become the most perfect human being by following His teachings. If anyone is
fortunate enough to be attracted by all His Features of manifestation, one is sure to
be successful in the mission of one’s life. In one word, those who are interested in
being situated in spiritual existence can get easily relieved from the clutches of Maya
by the Grace of Lord Chaitanya, now presented in the book form of Teachings of
Lord Chaitanya, non-different from the Lord.

The conditioned soul, being engrossed in the material body, increases the pages
of history of all kinds of material activities. But the Teachings of Lord Chaitanya
can help the human society to stop such unnecessary and temporary activities, and
can elevate one to the topmost platform of spiritual activities, which begin after
liberation from material bondage. Such liberated activities in Krishna Consciousness
are the goal of human perfection. The false prestige of acquiring lordship over the
material Nature is illusion only, and one can get illuminating knowledge from the
Teachings of Lord Chaitanya, in order to advance in one’s spiritual existence.

One has to suffer or enjoy the fruits of one’s activity, and nobody can check the
laws of material Nature which govern such things. So long as one is engaged in such
activities, one is sure to be baffled in attempting to achieve the ultimate goal of life.
I hope therefore most sincerely that by understanding the Teachings of Lord
Preface XIX

Chaitanya human society will have a new light of spiritual life, opening the field of

activities of the pure soul.

Om Tat Sat

 

A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami

14 March 1968

(Birthday of Lord Chaitanya)
Sri Sri Radha Krishna Temple
New York, N.Y.
 

SRI SRIMAD A.C. BHAKTIVEDANTA SWAMI
THE FOUNDER ACHARYA OF ISKCON AND GREATEST EXPONENT
OF KRISHNA CONSCIOUSNESS IN THE WESTERN WORLD,
 

SRILA BHAKTISIDDHANTA SARASWATI GOSWAMI MAHARAJ
THE SPIRITUAL MASTER OF SRILA A.C. BHAKTIVEDANTA SWAMI
AND FOREMOST SCHOLAR AND DEVOTEE IN THE RECENT AGE,
 

SRILA GOUR KISORE DAS BABAJI MAHARAJ
THE SPIRITUAL MASTER OF SRILA BHAKTISIDDHANTA SARASWATI GOSWAMI
AND INTIMATE STUDENT OF SRILA THAKUR BHAKTIVINODE
os
t

“=
,

i +h _ ‘ial

 

SRILA THAKUR BHAKTIVINODE
THE PIONEER OF THE PROGRAM FOR BENEDICTING
THE ENTIRE WORLD WITH KRISHNA CONSCIOUSNESS
BY THE INSTRUCTIONS OF LORD CHAITANYA
 

SRI PANCHA TATTVA
LORD KRISHNA CHAITANYA SURROUNDED (FROM LEFT TO RIGHT)
BY HIS AVATAR (ADWAITA ACHARYA), HIS EXPANSION
(LORD NITYANANDA), HIS MANIFEST INTERNAL ENERGY
(SRI GADADHAR), AND HIS PERFECT DEVOTEE (SRI SRINIVAS).
SRIDHAMA MAYAPUR
THE BIRTHPLACE OF THE SUPREME LORD SRI KRISHNA CHAITANYA
IN THE PROVINCE OF GAUDA IN BENGAL,

 
PROLOGUE

      

. Wii
a , : an
She

THE LIFE OF CHAITANYA MAHAPRABHU

by
Srila Thakur Bhaktivinode

Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was born in Mayapur in the town of Nadia, just
after sunset on the evening of the 23rd Falgoon 1407 Sakabda, answering
to the 18th February 1486 of the Christian Era. The moon was eclipsed at the
time of His birth, and the people of Nadia were then engaged, as is usual on
such occasions, in bathing in the Bhagirathi with loud cheers of Haribol.
His father, Jagannath Misra, was a poor Brahmin of the Vaidic order, and
His mother, Sachi Devi, was a model good woman, both descended from
Brahmin stocks originally residing in Sylhet. Mahaprabhu was a beautiful
child and the ladies of the town came to see Him with presents. His mother’s
father, Pandit Nilambar Chakravarti, a renowned astrologer, foretold that
the Child would be a great personage in time; and he, therefore, gave Him
the name Vishwambhar. The ladies of the neighbourhood styled Him Gour
Hari on account of His golden complexion, and His mother called Him Nimai
on account of the Nim tree near which He was born. Beautiful as the Lad
was, everyone heartily loved to see Him every day. As He grew up He be
XXVII
XXVIII Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

came a whimsical and frolicsome Lad. After His fifth year, He was admitted
into a school where He picked up Bengali in a very short time.

Most of His contemporary biographers have mentioned certain anecdotes
regarding Chaitanya which are simply records of His early miracles. It is said
that when He was an infant in His mother’s arms, He wept continually, and
when the neighbouring ladies and His mother cried Haribol! He used to stop.
Thus there was a continuation of the utterance of Haribol in the house, foreshowing the future mission of the Hero. It has also been stated that when His
mother once gave Him sweetmeats to eat, He ate clay instead of the food.
His mother asking for the reason, He stated that as every sweetmeat was
nothing but clay transformed, He could eat clay as well. His mother, who was
the consort of a pandit, explained that every article in a special state was
adapted to a special use. Earth, while in the state of a jug, could be used as
a water pot, but in the state of a brick such a use was not possible. Clay, therefore, in the form of sweetmeats was usable as food and not clay in its other
states. The Lad was convinced and admitted His stupidity in eating clay, and
agreed to avoid the mistake in future.

Another miraculous act has been related. It is said that a Brahmin on
pilgrimage became a guest in His house, and cooked his food and read his
grace with meditation on Krishna. In the meantime, the Lad came and ate
up the cooked rice. The Brahmin, astonished at the Lad’s act, cooked again
at the request of Jagannath Misra. The Lad again ate up the cooked rice while
the Brahmin was offering the rice to Krishna with meditation. The Brahmin
was persuaded to cook for a third time. This time all the inmates of the house
had fallen asleep, and the Lad showed Himself as Krishna to the traveller,
and blessed him. The Brahmin was then lost in ecstasy at the appearance of
the Object of his worship.

It has also been stated that two thieves stole away the Lad from-His father’s
door with a view to purloin His jewels and gave Him sweetmeats on the way.
The Lad exercised His illusory energy and deceived the thieves back towards
His own house. The thieves, for fear of detection, left the Boy there and fled.

Another miraculous act has been described of the Lad’s demanding and
getting from Hiranya and Jagadisha all the offerings they had collected for
worshipping Krishna on the day of Ekadashi. When only four years of age
He sat on rejected cooking pots which were considered unholy by His mother.
He explained to His mother that there was no question of holiness and unholiness as regards earthen pots thrown away after the cooking was over.
These anecdotes relate to the tender age up to the fifth year.

In His eighth year, He was admitted into the tol of Gangadas Pandit in
The Life of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu XXIX

Ganganagar close by the village of Mayapur. In two years He became well
read in Sanskrit Grammar and Rhetoric. His readings after that were of the
nature of self-study in His own house, where He had found all-important
books belonging to His father, who was a pandit himself. It appears that He
read the Swmriti in His own study and the Nyaya also, in competition with
His friends who were then studying under the celebrated Pandit Raghunath
Shiromani.

Now, after the tenth year of His age, Chaitanya became a passable scholar
in Grammar, Rhetoric, the Smriti and the Nyaya. It was after this that His
elder brother Vishwarup left his house and accepted the asram (status) of a
sanyasi (ascetic). Chaitanya, though a very young Boy, consoled His parents,
saying that He would serve them with a view to please God. Just after that,
His father left this world. His mother was exceedingly sorry, and Mahaprabhu,
with His usually contented appearance, consoled his widowed mother.

It was at the age of 14 or 15 that Mahaprabhu was married to Lakshmi
Devi, the daughter of Ballabha Acharya, also of Nadia. He was at this age
considered one of the best scholars of Nadia, the renowned seat of Nyaya
philosophy and Sanskrit learning. Not to speak of the smarta pandits, the
naiyaiks were all afraid of confronting Him in literary discussions. Being a
married man, He went to Eastern Bengal on the banks of the Padma for
acquirement of wealth. There He displayed His learning and obtained a good
sum of money.

It was at this time that He preached Vaishnavism at intervals. After teaching
him the principles of Vaishnavism, He ordered Tapan Misra to go and live
in Benares. During His residence in East Bengal, His wife Lakshmi Devi left
this world from the effects of snake-bite. On returning home, He found His
mother in a mourning state. He consoled her with a lecture on the uncertainty
of human affairs. It was at His mother’s request that He married Vishnupriya,
the daughter of Raj pandit Sanatan Misra. His comrades joined Him on
His return from pravas, or sojourn.

He was now so renowned that He was considered to be the best pandit
in Nadia. Keshab Misra of Kashmere, who had called himself the Great
Digvijayi, came to Nadia with a view to discuss with the pandits of that place.
Afraid of the so-called conquering pandit, the tol professors of Nadia left
their town on pretence of invitation, and Keshab met Mahaprabhu at the
Barokonaghat in Mayapur and, after a very short discussion with Him, he
got defeated by the Boy and mortification obliged him to decamp. Nimai
Pandit was now the most important pandit of His times.

It was at the age of 16 or 17 that He travelled to Gaya with a host of His
xxx Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

students, and there took His spiritual initiation from Iswara Puri, a Vaishnava
sanyasi and a disciple of the renowned Madhavendra Puri. Upon His return
to Nadia, Nimai Pandit turned religious preacher, and His religious nature
became so strongly represented that Advaita Prabhu, Srivasa and others,
who had before the birth of Chaitanya already accepted the Vaishnava faith,
were astonished at the change in the young Man. He was then no more a
contending naiyaika, a wrangling smarta and a criticizing rhetorician. He
swooned at the Name of Krishna, and behaved as an inspired man under the
influence of His religious sentiment. It has been described by Murari Gupta,
an eyewitness, that He showed His heavenly powers in the house of Srivasa
Pandit in the presence of hundreds of His followers, who were mostly wellread scholars.

It was at this time that He opened a nocturnal school of kirtan in the
compound of Srivasa Pandit with His sincere followers. There He preached,
there He sang, there He danced, and there He expressed all sorts of religious
feelings. Nityananda Prabhu, who was then a preacher of Vaishnavism, and
who had then completed his travels all over India, joined Him by that time.
In fact a host of pandit preachers of Vaishnavism, all sincere at heart, came
and joined Him from different parts of Bengal. Nadia now became the regular
seat of a host of Vaishnava acharyas, saintly teachers, whose mission it was
to spiritualize Mankind with the highest influence of the Vaishnava, devotional,
creed.

The first mandate that He issued to Prabhu Nityananda and Haridas,
His close associates, was this: “Go, friends, go through the streets of the town,
meet every man at his door and ask him to sing the Name of Hari with a holy
life, and you then come and report to Me every evening the result of your
preaching.” Thus ordered, the two preachers went on and met Jagai and
Madhai, the two most abominable characters. They insulted the preachers
on hearing Mahaprabhu’s mandate, but were soon converted by the influence
of bhakti, inculcated by their Lord.

The people of Nadia were now surprised. They said, “Nimai Pandit is
not only a gigantic genius, but He is certainly a missionary from God Almighty.” From this time to His 23rd year, Mahaprabhu preached His principles not only in Nadia but in all important towns and villages around His
city. In the houses of His followers He showed miracles, taught the esoteric
principles of bhakti, and sang His samkirtan with other bhaktas, or devotees.
His followers of the town of Nadia commenced to sing the Holy Name of
Hari in the streets and bazaars. This created a sensation and roused different
The Life of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu XXXI

feelings in different quarters. The bhaktas were highly pleased. The smarta,
caste-conscious Brahmins, became jealous of Nimai Pandit’s success, and
complained to Chand Kazi against the character of Chaitanya as un-Hindu.
The Kazi came to Srivas Pandit’s house and broke a mridanga (drum used in
samkirtan) there, and declared that unless Nimai Pandit ceased to make noise
about His queer religion, he should be obliged to enforce Mohamedanism
on Him and His followers.

This was brought to Mahaprabhu’s notice. He ordered the town-people
to appear in the evening, each with a torch in his hand. This they did, and
Nimai marched out with His samkirtan divided into 14 groups, and on His
arrival at the Kazi’s house, He held a long conversation with the Kazi, and
in the end communicated into his heart His Vaishnava influence by touching
his body. The Kazi then wept and admitted that he had felt a keen spiritual
influence which had cleared up his doubts and produced in him a religious
sentiment which gave him the highest ecstasy. The Kazi then joined the
samkirtan party. The world was astonished at the spiritual power of the
Great Lord, and hundreds and hundreds of heretics converted, joining the
banner of Vishwambhar after this affair.

It was after this that some of the jealous and low-minded Brahmins of
Kulia picked a quarrel with Mahaprabhu and collected a party to oppose
Him. Nimai Pandit was naturally a soft-hearted Person, though strong in
His principles. He declared that party feeling and sectarianism were the two
great enemies of progress, and as long as He should continue to be an inhabitant
of Nadia, belonging to a certain family, His mission would not meet with
complete success. He then resolved to be a citizen of the world by cutting off
His connection with a particular family, caste and creed; and, with this resolution, He embraced the position of a sanyasi at Kutwa, under the guidance of
Keshab Bharati of that town, in the 24th year of His life. His mother and
wife wept bitterly for His separation, but our Hero, though soft in heart,
was a strong Person in principle. He left His little world in His house for the
unlimited spiritual world of Krishna with Man in general.

After His sanyasa, He was induced to visit the house of Advaitaprabhu
in Santipur. Advaita managed to invite all His friends and admirers from
Nadia and brought Sachi Devi to see her Son. Both pleasure and pain invaded
her heart when she saw her Son in the attire of a sanyasi. As a sanyasi Krishna
Chaitanya put up nothing but a kaupin and a bahirbas (outer covering).
His head was without hair and His hands bore a danda (stick) and a kamandalu
(hermit’s water pot).
XXXII Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

The holy Son fell at the feet of His beloved mother and said, “Mother!
this Body is yours and I must obey your orders. Permit Me to go to Vrindaban for My spiritual attainments.” The mother, in consultation with
Advaita and others, asked her Son to reside in Puri, the town of Lord Jagannath, so that she might obtain His information now and then. Mahaprabhu
agreed to that proposition, and in a few days left Santipur for Orissa.

His biographers have described the journey of Krishna Chaitanya (that
was the name He got after His sanyasa) from Santipur to Puri in great detail.
He travelled along the side of the Bhagirathi as far as Chhatrabhog, situated
now in Thana Mathurapur, Diamond Harbour 24 Pergs. There He took a
boat and went as far as Pryag Ghat in the Midnapur District. Thence He
walked through Balasore and Cuttack to Puri, seeing the temple of Bhubaneswar on His way. Upon His arrival at Puri, He saw Jagannath in the temple,
and put up with Sarvabhauma at the request of the latter.

Sarvabhauma was a gigantic pandit of the day. His readings knew no
bounds. He was the best Naiyaik of the times, and was known as the most
erudite scholar in the Vedanta Philosophy of the school of Shankaracharya.
He was born in Nadia (Vidyanagar) and taught innumerable pupils in the
Nyaya Philosophy in his tol there. He had left for Puri sometime before the
birth of Nimai Pandit. His brother-in-law, Gopinath Misra, introduced our
new Sanyasi to Sarvabhauma, who was astonished at His personal beauty,
and feared that it would be difficult for the young Man to maintain sanyasdharma during the long run of His life. Gopinath, who had known Mahaprabhu from Nadia, had a great reverence for Him and gave out that the
Sanyasi was not a common human being. On this point Gopinath and Sarvabhauma had a hot discussion. Sarvabhauma then requested Mahaprabhu
to hear his recitation of the Vedanta Sutras, to which the latter tacitly submitted.

Chaitanya heard with silence what the great Sarvabhauma uttered with
gravity, for seven days, at the end of which the latter said, “Krishna
Chaitanya! I think You do not understand the Vedanta, as You do not say
anything after hearing my recitation and explanations.”

The reply of Chaitanya was that He understood the sutras very well, but
He could not make out what Shankaracharya meant by his commentaries.

Astonished at this, Sarvabhauma said, “How is it that You understand the
meanings of the sutras and do not understand the commentaries which explain
the sutras? All well! If You understand the sutras, please let me have Your
interpretations !”
The Life of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu XX XIII

Mahaprabhu thereupon explained all the sutras in His own way, without
touching the pantheistic commentary of Shankara. The keen understanding
of Sarvabhauma saw the truth, beauty and harmony of arguments in the
explanations given by Chaitanya, and obliged him to utter that it was the
first time that he had found one who could explain the Brahma Sutras in such
a simple manner. He admitted also that the commentaries of Shankara never
gave such natural explanations of the Vedanta Sutras as he had obtained from
Mahaprabhu. He then submitted himself as an advocate and follower. In a
few days Sarvabhauma turned out as one of the best Vaishnavas of the time.
Report ran out, and the whole of Orissa sang the praise of Krishna Chaitanya,
and hundreds and hundreds came to Him and became His followers. In the
meantime, Mahaprabhu thought of visiting Southern India, and He started
with one Krishnadas Brahmin for the journey.

His biographers have given us a detail of the journey. He first went to
Kurmakshetra, where He did a miracle by curing a leper named Vasudev.
He met Ramananda Rai, the governor of Vidyanagar on the banks of the
Godavari, and had a philosophical conversation with him on the subject of
Prembhakti, loving devotion. He worked another miracle by touching (making
them immediately disappear) the seven Tal trees, through which Ramchandra,
the son of Dasarath, had shot His arrow and killed the great Bali Raj. He
preached Vaishnavism and nam-samkirtan, chanting of the Holy Names of
God, throughout the journey. At Rangakshetra He stayed for four months
in the house of one Venkata Bhatta in order to spend the rainy season. There
He converted the whole family of Venkata from Ramanuji Vaishnavism
into Krishna bhakta, along with the son of Venkata, a boy of ten years named
Gopal, who afterwards came to Vrindaban and became one of the six Gosvamins or Prophets serving under their leader Sri Krishna Chaitanya. Trained
up in Sanskrit by his uncle Probodhananda Saraswati, Gopal wrote several
books on Vaishnavism.

Chaitanya visited numerous places in Southern India as far as Cape Comorin and returned to Puri in two years by Panderpur on the Bhima. In this
latter place He spiritualized one Tukaram, who became from that time a
religious preacher himself. This fact has been admitted in his abhangas, which
have been collected in a volume by Mr. Satyendra Nath Tagore of the Bombay
Civil Service. During His journey He had discussions with the Buddhists,
the Jains and the Mayavadis in several places, and converted His opponents
to Vaishnavism, the worship of God as a Person.

Upon His return to Puri, Raja Prataprudra Dev and several pandit BrahXXXIV Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

mins joined the banners of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. He was now twenty-seven
years of age. In His 28th year He went to Bengal as far as Gaud in Maldah.
There He picked up two great personages named Rupa and Sanatan. Though
descended from the lines of the Karnatic Brahmins, these two brothers turned
out demi-Moslems by their continual contact with Hossain Shah, the thenEmperor of Gaud. Their names had been changed by the Emperor into
Dabirkhash and Saker Mallik, and their master loved them heartily as they
were both learned in Persian, Arabic and Sanskrit, and were loyal servants
of the state. The two gentlemen had found no way to come back as regular
Hindus, and had written to Mahaprabhu while He was at Puri, for spiritual
help. Mahaprabhu had written in reply that He would come to them and
extricate them out of their spiritual difficulties. Now that He had come to
Gaud both the brothers appeared before Him with their longstanding prayer.
Mahaprabhu ordered them to go to Vrindaban and meet Him there.

Chaitanya returned to Puri through Santipur, where He again met His
dear mother. After a short stay at Puri He left for Vrindaban. This time He
was accompanied by one Balabhadra Bhattacharya. He visited Vrindaban
and came down to Prayag (Allahabad), converting a large number of Mohamedans to Vaishnavism by argument from the Koran. The descendants of
those converts are still known as Pathan Vaishnavas. Rupa Goswami met
Him at Allahabad, and Chaitanya trained him up in spirituality in ten days,
and directed him to go to Vrindaban on missions. His first mission was to write
theological works explaining scientifically pure bhakti and prema, devotional
service, and love of Godhead. The second mission was to revive the places
where Krishna Chandra had in the end of Dvapara Yuga, the previous Age,
exhibited His lila, or Pastimes, for the benefit of the religious world. Rupa
Goswami left Allahabad for Vrindaban, and Mahaprabhu came down to
Benares. There He put up in the house of Chandrasekhar, and accepted His
daily bhiksha (meal) in the house of Tapan Misra. Here it was that Sanatan
Goswami joined Him, and took instruction for two months in spiritual
matters.

The biographers, especially Krishnadas Kaviraj, have given us details of
Chaitanya’s teachings to Rupa and Sanatan. Krishnadas was not a contemporary writer, but he gathered his information from the Goswamins themselves, the direct disciples of Mahaprabhu. Jiva Goswami, who was the
nephew of Sanatan and Rupa, and who has left us his invaluable work the
Sad-sandarbha has philosophized on the precepts of his great leader. We have
gathered and summarized the precepts of Chaitanya from the books of those
great writers.
The Life of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu XXXV

While at Benares, Chaitanya had an interview with the learned sanyasis
of that town in the house of a Marhatta Brahmin, who had invited all the
sanyasis for an entertainment. At this interview, Chaitanya showed a miracle
which attracted all the sanyasis to Him. Then ensued reciprocal conversation.
The sanyasis were headed by their most learned leader Prakasananda Saraswati. After a short controversy, they submitted to Mahaprabhu, and admitted
that they had been misled by the commentaries of Shankaracharya. It was
impossible even for learned scholars to oppose Chaitanya for a long time, as
there was some spell in Him which touched their hearts and made them weep
for their spiritual improvement. The sanyasis of Benares soon fell at the Feet
of Chaitanya and asked for His grace (kripa). Chaitanya then preached pure
bhakti, and instilled into their hearts spiritual love for Krishna which obliged
them to give up sectarian feelings. The whole of Benares, on this wonderful
conversion of the sanyasis, turned Vaishnava, and they made a master samkirtan
with their new Lord.

After sending Sanatan to Vrindaban, Mahaprabhu went to Puri again
by the jungles, with His comrade Balabhadra. Balabhadra reported that
Mahaprabhu had shown a good many miracles on His way to Puri, such as
making tigers and elephants dance, on hearing the name of Krishna.

From this time, that is, from His 31st year, Mahaprabhu continually lived
in Puri in the house of Kasi Misra, until His disappearance in His forty-eighth
year at the time of samkirtan in the temple of Tota Gopinath. During these
18 years, His life was one of settled love and piety. He was surrounded by
numerous followers, all of whom were of the highest order of the Vaishnavas,
and distinguished from the common people by their purest character and
learning, firm religious principles and spiritual love of Radha Krishna.

Svarup-Damodar, who had been known by the name of Purushottamacharya while Mahaprabhu was in Nadia, joined Him from Benares and accepted His service as His secretary. No production of any poet or philosopher
could be laid before Mahaprabhu unless Svarup had passed it as pure and
useful. Rai Ramananda was his second mate. Both he and Svarup sang while
Mahaprabhu expressed His sentiment on a certain point of worship. Paramananda Puri was His minister in matters of religion. There are hundreds of
anecdotes described by His biographers which we do not think it meet here
to reproduce. Mahaprabhu slept short. His sentiments carried him farther
and farther in the firmament of spirituality every day and night, and all His
admirers and followers watched Him throughout. He worshipped, communicated with his missionaries at Vrindaban, and conversed with those
religious men who newly came to visit Him. He sang and danced, took no
XXXVI Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

care of Himself and oft-times lost Himself in religious beatitude. All who came
to Him believed Him as the All-beautiful God appearing in the netherworld
for the benefit of Mankind. He loved His mother all along, and sent her
Mahaprasad, spiritual foods, now and then with those who went to Nadia.
He was most amiable in nature. Humility was personified in Him. His sweet
appearance gave cheer to all who came in contact with Him. He appointed
Prabhu Nityananda as the missionary in charge of Bengal. He despatched six
disciples, the Goswamis, to Vrindaban to preach love in the upcountry. He
punished all of His disciples who deviated from a holy life. This He markedly
did in the case of junior Haridas. He never lacked in giving proper instructions
in life to those who solicited them. This will be seen in His teachings to
Raghunath Das Goswami. His treatment of Haridas (senior) shows how He
loved spiritual men, and how He defied caste distinction in the cause of
spiritual brotherhood.
 

Lord Chaitanya’s Mission

Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu instructed His disciples to write books on
the Science of Krishna, a task which those who follow Him have continued
to carry out down to the present day. The elaborations and expositions on the
philosophy taught by Lord Chaitanya are in fact the most voluminous, exacting and consistent—due to the unbreakable system of disciplic succession—
of any religious culture in the world. Yet Lord Chaitanya, in His youth widely
renowned as a scholar, Himself left us only eight verses, called Sikshastak,
in which His mission and precepts are revealed. Here, rendered by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami, are these eight supremely valuable prayers:

I.

Glory to the Sri Krishna Samkirtan which cleanses the heart of all the dust accumulated for years together. Thus the fire of conditional life, of repeated birth and

death, is extinguished. This Samkirtan movement is the prime benediction for

XAXXVII
XXXVIII Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

humanity at large because it spreads the rays of the benediction Moon. It is the life
of all transcendental knowledge, it increases the ocean of transcendental bliss, and it
helps to have a taste of the full nectar for which we are always anxious.

2.

O my Lord! Your Holy Name alone can render all benediction upon the living
beings, and therefore You have hundreds and millions of Names, like Krishna, Govinda, etc. In these transcendental Names You have invested all Your transcendental
energies, and there is no hard and fast rule for chanting these Holy Names. O my
Lord! You have so kindly made approach to You easy by Your Holy Names, but,
unfortunate as I am, I have no attraction for Them.

3.

One can chant the Holy Name of the Lord in a humble state of mind, thinking
himself lower than the straw in the street, more tolerant than the tree, devoid of all
sense of false prestige, and ready to offer all respects to others. In such a state of mind
one can chant the Holy Name of the Lord constantly.

A.

O almighty Lord! I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor I have any desire
to enjoy beautiful women; neither do I want any number of followers of mine. What
I want only is that I may have Your causeless devotional service in my life—birth

after birth.

5.

O Son of Maharaj Nanda, I am Your eternal servitor, and although I am so,
somehow or other I have fallen in the ocean of birth and death. Please, therefore,
pick me up from this ocean of death, and fix me as one of the atoms of Your Lotus
Feet.

6.

O my Lord! when shall my eyes be decorated with tears of love, flowing constantly
while I chant Your Holy Name? When will my words be choked up when uttering
Lord Chaitanya’s Mission XXXIX

the Holy Name? And when will all the holes of hair on my body have eruptions
by the recitation of Your Name?

Te

O Govinda! Feeling Your separation I am considering a moment twelve years
or more, and tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain. I am feeling all
vacant in the world, in the absence of You.

8.

I do not know anyone except Krishna as my Lord, and He shall always remain
as such, even if He handles me roughly by His embrace; or He may make me brokenhearted by not being present before me. He is completely free to do anything and
everything, but He is always my worshipful Lord, unconditionally.
   

/ | | WY

a

:
[\\\

“ 1 |

INTRODUCTION

Delivered as five morning lectures on the Chaitanya Charitamrita; the authoritative biography of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, written by Krishna Das Kaviraj;
before the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, New York City, April
10-14, 1967.

Chaitanya means the living force. You and I can move, but a table cannot
because it has no living force. Not only movement, but resistance is also a
sign of living force. Chaitanya means activities, Amrita means immortal, and
Charitra means character. There is no activity without living force. The
material condition has living force but is not Amrita, immortal. Chaitanya
Charitamrita, then, means the Character of the Living Force in Immortality.

But how is this displayed? It is not displayed by you or I—none of us are
immortal in these bodies. We have living force and activities, and we are
immortal by nature and constitution. But the material condition into which
we have been put doesn’t allow these qualities to be displayed. It is stated
in the Katha Upanishad that eternality and living force are characteristic of

I
2 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

both ourselves and God. But God and ourselves, although both immortal,
are different. The living entities have many activities, but have a tendency
to fall down. God has no such tendency. He is All-powerful. He never comes
under the control of material Nature, because material Nature is only a display
of His energy.

There is a nice example of this: When I was flying from San Francisco,
the plane was above the cloud ocean. Above the cloud was the sun; and though
we came down through the cloud and everything in New York was dim,
still, above the cloud, the sun was shining. A cloud cannot cover the whole
world—it can’t even cover the whole United States, which is not more than
a speck in the universe. From the sky the skyscrapers are very tiny, just as
from God’s position all this nonsense becomes insignificant. I, the living entity,
am very insignificant, and my tendency is to come down; but God hasn't
got this tendency. The Supreme Lord doesn’t come down to Maya, and more
than the sun comes under the cloud. But we have the tendency to be controlled by Maya. Mayavadis, impersonalist philosophers, say that because
we are under the control of Maya in this world, when God comes, He is also
put under the control of Maya. This is the fallacy of their philosophy.

Lord Chaitanya therefore is not one of us. He is Krishna Himself, the
Supreme Living Entity. He doesn’t come under the cloud of Maya. Krishna
and His expansions, or even His higher devotees, are never in the clutches of
Maya. Lord Chaitanya came to preach Krishna Bhakti: Lord Krishna Himself
is teaching us how to approach Krishna; just as the teacher, seeing a student
not doing well, takes the pencil and says, “Do it like this, write like this: A,
B, C.” But we must not mistakenly think that the teacher is learning the
ABC’s. Teaching us how to become Krishna conscious is Lord Chaitanya’s
position, and we must study Him in that light.

In Bhagavad Gita the Lord says, “Give up all this nonsense and surrender
to Me.” And we say “Oh—surrender? Give up? But I have so many responsibilities.” And Maya says to us, “Don’t do it, or you'll be out of my clutches.
Stay in my clutches, and I'll kick you.” It’s true; you are being kicked by
Maya. Do you know how Maya kicks? The she-ass kicks the male-ass in the
face when he comes for sex. Among the cats, they fight and whine. These
are the teachings of Nature. She tricks. It is like the capture of an elephant.
He is caught in the forest by the use of a trained she-elephant, who leads him
and makes him fall into a pit. Maya has many activities, and her shackle is
the female. Of course, male and female means this outer dress—we are all
actually Krishna's servants. But we are shackled by iron chains which are
Introduction 3

beautiful women. Every male is bound up by sex life; and therefore sex life
should be controlled. Unrestricted sex life puts you fully in the clutches of
Maya. Lord Chaitanya got away from this Maya at the age of twenty-four—
His wife was sixteen and his mother seventy, and He was the only male of the
family; He was a Brahmin, and not rich—but He took Sannyasa, the renounced
order, and didn’t care for the Maya of wife and mother.

If you want to become fully Krishna conscious, you have to give up the
shackles of Maya. Or, if you remain with Maya, you should live in such a
way that there is no illusion. Lord Chaitanya had many house-holders among
His closest devotees. Yet one renounced devotee of His, Junior Haridas, who
was important for being a good Kirtan singer, glanced lustfully at a young
woman, and he was at once rejected by Lord Chaitanya: “You are living with
Me in the renounced order, and yet looking at a woman with lust.” This
Junior Haridas later committed suicide in despair over his separation from
Chaitanya. Other devotees had approached Chaitanya and asked Him to
forgive Junior Haridas, but Chaitanya replied, “You all go live with him and
forgive him. I'll stay alone.” And when the news of Junior Haridas’ suicide
reached Him, Lord Chaitanya, Who was aware of everything that was happening, said, “Very good, that is very good.” A householder devotee of His
pleased Chaitanya, and Chaitanya, on learning of the devotee’s wife being
pregnant, asked that the baby be given a certain auspicious name. So He
approved of householders, having sex in a regulated way; but He was strict—
like a thunderbolt—with those of the renounced order who cheated by the
method known as “drinking water underwater while taking a bath on a fast
day.”

From Chaitanya Charitamrita we learn how Chaitanya has taught people
to become immortal. Krishna and all reformers also taught this to people;
They are mortified that people should prolong their mortal life, instead of
arranging it so as to make the next life immortal.

So Chaitanya Charitamrita means the Immortal Character of the Living
Force. The Supreme Living Force is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
There are innumerable living entities, all individual. This is very easy to
understand: We are all different, in thought, in desires—and the Supreme
Lord is also an individual Person, like you and me. But He is the Leader.
No one can excel Him. Among us, one can excel another in one capacity or
another. Similarly, the Lord is individual, but He is Supreme. Achyuta is
another name for Krishna—The Infallible. In the Bhagavad Gita, Arjuna had
a delusion, but Krishna had none. God is infalliable. In the Gita He states:
4 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

“T appear in My own internal potency.” He is not overpowered by the material potency when He is in the material world; Krishna and the incarnations
are not under its control—They are free. In Srimad Bhagwatam this is the
definition of godly nature—one is not affected although in material Nature.
Even a devotee can attain this freedom. Rupa Goswami explains that, if you
want to remain unattached to material contamination, the formula is to make
your ambition to serve Krishna. How to serve? It is not done by simply
meditating, which is just an activity of the mind, but by practical work. It is
achieved by working for Krishna. No resource should be left unused; whatever
is there, whatever you have, should be used for Krishna by practical work.
We can use everything: airplanes, the atom bomb, anything. If you speak
to an audience of Krishna Consciousness, that is also service. If your mind,
senses, speech, money, and energy are engaged, then you are not in material
Nature. Krishna and His expansions and His devotees are not in material
Nature, but foolish persons think that They are.

Chaitanya Charitamrita means that the spirit soul is immortal, and that
activities in the Spiritual World are also immortal. The Mayavadis, those who
hold to the view that the Absolute is impersonal and formless, say that a
realized soul has no more need to talk. The Vaishnava says, “No, talking begins
at that stage. Our previous talk was nonsense and had no value; now let us
begin real talk: talks of Krishna.”

The Mayavadis use the example of the water pot: when the pot is not filled
with water, it makes a sound; but when the pot is filled it makes no sound.
But am Ia water pot? Can I be compared to a water pot? Logically, an analogy
points out similarities, and the greatest number of similarities between the
two objects makes the best analogy. A water pot is not an active living force.
A pot can’t move. So ever-silent meditation is inadequate. Why? Because we
have so much to say about Krishna that we don’t have time to finish when there are
only twenty-four hours in a day. The fool, however, is celebrated as long as he
doesn’t speak. When he breaks his silence his lack of knowledge is exposed.
Chaitanya Charitamrita shows that there are so many things to discover, simply
for glorifying the Supreme.

Krishna Das Kaviraj Goswami writes: “I offer my respects to my Spiritual
Masters.” He uses the plural to express the disciplic succession. Not that my
Spiritual Master only is offered obeisances, but the whole Parampara, the
chain of disciplic succession. The Guru is addressed in the plural to show the
highest respect. After offering respect to the disciplic succession, it is offered
to devotees, other Godbrothers, the Spiritual Master, expansions of Godhead,
Introduction 5

and His first manifestation of energy. Krishna Chaitanya appears in all together:
God, Guru, devotee, expansion. As His associate Nityananda, He is a manifestation; as Adwaita, He is an incarnation; as Gadadhar, He is the internal
potency; and as Srivas, He is the marginal living entity. Krishna is not thought
of alone, but is conceived all at once, as is described by Ramanujacharya: In
Suddha Adwaita philosophy energy, expansion, and incarnation are Oneness
in diversity. Everything together is God.

Chaitanya Charitamrita is thus the post-graduate study of spiritual knowledge. One advances from the Bhagavad Gita, through Srimad Bhagwatam,
to Chaitanya Charitamrita. Although all are on the same Absolute level, yet
by comparative study, Chaitanya Charitamrita is on this higher platform, and
every verse is perfectly composed. The process of offering obeisances is to
directly offer respects to Chaitanya and Nityananda—these two Personalities
are compared to the Sun and the Moon, who dissipate darkness. Both the
Sun and the Moon have risen together in this case: Chaitanya is so kind that
to dissipate the darkness They both appear together.

Who is Krishna Chaitanya? In the Upanishads, the Supreme Absolute
Truth is described in an impersonal way, but the Personal view is also given
in the Isha Upanishad, at the end, after a description of the All-pervading:
“My dear Lord, You are hidden by the Cover of Brahmajyoti. Let me penetrate
that Brahmajyoti to approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead.” Those
who have no such power stop at the effulgence; but.at the end of the
Upanishad there is a hymn to the Personality of Godhead. The impersonal
Brahman is described there. That Brahman is the glaring effulgence of the body
of Chaitanya. The Paramatma is the partial representation of Chaitanya. He is
that Supreme Personality of Godhead, full with six opulences: wealth, fame,
strength, beauty, knowledge, and renunciation. You should know that He is
Krishna, and nothing is equal to, or greater than, Him. There is no superior
conception. He is the Supreme Person.

There is a nice verse by Rupa Goswami, who, as a confidential devotee,
was taught for more than ten days continuously by Lord Chaitanya. He has
written about Lord Chaitanya: “There were many incarnations of Krishna,
but He excels all others. He is giving something that was never given by an
incarnation before, not even by Krishna Himself.”

Chaitanya begins from the surrendering point, and He is completely
spiritual. He begins at the end of material existence, when one gives up all
material attachment. In the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna began by distinguishing
the soul from matter, and ended at the point of the soul surrendered in devo6 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

tion. But there is no stoppage of talk there, as the Mayavadis would have it.
The real talk only begins. As is stated in the Vedanta Sutra, “Now talking begins.
Now we can inquire into the Supreme Absolute Truth.” Rupa Goswami
writes: “Your incarnation is greater than all. What You have given! It is
the highest form of devotional service.”

One who accepts the existence of God is in devotional service. To acknowledge, “God is great” is something—but not much. Chaitanya preached like
an Acharya, a great teacher, up to the point of friendship. In the Gita, Krishna
showed Arjuna His Universal Form because he was a dear friend; but Arjuna
asked forgiveness for this friendship on seeing Krishna as the Lord of the
Universes. Through Lord Chaitanya you can become a friend of Krishna,
where there is no limit. You can become a friend, not in adoration, but in
complete freedom. You can also be related to God as His father. This is
Srimad Bhagwatam philosophy. There is no other literature in the world where
God is treated as the devotee’s son. Usually He is the Father Who supplies
the demands of the son. Chaitanya is the first to treat God as a son. How?
By service. The son demands, and the father supplies. You don’t take the
supply, you give. Krishna’s mother, Yasoda, said to the Lord: “Here—eat
or Youll die. Eat nicely.” Krishna will depend on your mercy. This is such
a uniquely high level of friendship. And you can believe that you are His
father.

And, above all, you can treat Krishna as your Lover, as if He’s so much
attached to you that He expresses His inability to reciprocate. “I cannot repay
your love. I have no more assets to return.” Krishna was thus so obliged to
the Gopis, that He felt His inability to return their love. Devotional service
is such an excellent plattorm—and this was given by Chaitanya. It was never
given by any previous incarnation or Acharya.

“Devotional service itself is the highest platform—the glorious platform
which You have contributed. You are Krishna, yellowish, Sachinandan, son
of Sachi. Chaitanya Charitamrita hearers may keep You in their hearts. Then
it will be easy to understand Krishna through Chaitanya.” Chaitanya came
to deliver Krishna. Rupa Goswami writes: “You are the most charitable
Personality. You are delivering Krishna Prema, unalloyed love for Krishna.
And so I offer You my respects.”

We have heard the phrase, “Love of Godhead.” How far this love of
Godhead can actually be developed we can learn from the Vaishnava philosophy. Simply theoretical knowledge of love of God you can find in many
places and many Scriptures; but what that love of Godhead actually is, and
Introduction 7

how it is developed—that can be found in the Vaishnava literature. It is the
unique and the highest development of love of God that is given by Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu.

Now we have a little sense of love. Why? It is due to love of Godhead.
Anything which we find within our experience, even in this conditional life,
is situated in the Supreme Lord, Who is the ultimate Source of Everything.
In our original relationship with the Supreme Lord there is real love. That
love is reflected through material conditions, but reflected pervertedly, and
not exactly. Real love means that which is continuous, and without a break,
but because that love is reflected pervertedly in this material world, love
lacks continuity and is inebriating. If we want real, transcendental love, then
we have to transfer our love to the Supreme Lovable Object—Krishna the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the whole basic principle of Krishna
Consciousness.

In material consciousness we are trying to love that which is not at all
lovable. We are giving our love to dogs, to cats—with the risk that if we love
cats and dogs too much, at the time of our death we may be fixed in thinking
of them, and therefore take our next birth in a family of cats or dogs. Everything without love of Krishna leads downward. In the Hindu Scripture, the
chastity of woman is very much recommended. Why? Because if a woman
becomes much addicted in love of her husband, at the time of death she will
remember him, and in the next life she is promoted to a man’s body. Man’s
life is better than woman’s, because a man has better facility for understanding
spiritual science.

But Krishna Consciousness is so nice that it makes no distinction between
man and woman. In the Bhagavad Gita you will find: “If somebody, even if
he is born in a low family, even a woman or a Sudra or a Vaishya—anyone
who takes shelter of Me is sure to achieve My association.” That is guaranteed.
And Krishna says that if these people can achieve the highest perfection of
life, then why not the real Brahmins, devotees, and saintly kings? They are
sure to achieve the highest perfection.

Chaitanya Mahaprabhu gave us information: First of all you must know
that in every country or every Scripture there is some hint of love of Godhead,
but nobody knows what love of Godhead actually is. That is the distinction
between other Scriptures and the Vedic Scriptures. The others have some idea
of love of God—but regarding how to love Godhead, and what is Godhead,
they have no idea. They promote official love of Godhead. But here Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu gives a practical demonstration of how to love God in a conjugal
8 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

relationship. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu takes the part of Radharani and tries
to love Krishna as Radharani loved Him. Krishna could not understand,
“How does Radharani give Me such pleasure?” So in order to study Radharani, Krishna lived Her role and tried to understand Himself. This is the
secret of Lord Chaitanya’s incarnation. That is explained in the next verse.

This verse says, “I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Lord,
Who is absorbed in the modes of Radharani’s thought.” He is Krishna, but
He has taken the mode of Radharani to show how to love Krishna. And what
is Radha Krishna? Radha Krishna is the exchange of love. And what is that
love? This is not ordinary love. Krishna has immense potencies, of which
three are principal: internal, external, and marginal potency. In the internal
potency there are three divisions: Sambit, Alahadini and Sandhini.

The Alahadini potency is the pleasure potency. We must always know
that we also have this pleasure-seeking potency. We are all trying to have
pleasure; this is the nature of the living entity. We are now trying to enjoy
our pleasure potency in this material condition, with this body, by bodily
contact. But do you think that Krishna, Who is always Spiritual, will also
seek pleasure on this material plane? What nonsense this is! Krishna describes
this place as non-permanent and full of miseries. Do you think Krishna is
going to seek pleasure in this material form? How is it possible? He is the
Supersoul, He is the Supreme Spirit; how can He seek pleasure in matter?

Therefore, to learn how Krishna’s pleasure can be obtained, you have to
study the first Nine Cantos of Srimad Bhagwatam. In the Tenth Canto, Krishna’s
pleasure potency is displayed as He plays with Radharani, and as He plays
with the damsels of Vraja. Unfortunately, people of less intelligence turn
at once to the pleasure potency sports of Krishna in the Dasama Skanda, the
Tenth Canto. These pictures of Krishna embracing Radharani, or of the
Rasa Dance, are unfortunately not understood by ordinary men, because they
do not understand Krishna. They will falsely understand that Krishna is like
us, and just as we want to embrace a young girl, so He embraces the Gopis.
These people write books because they think that this is a kind of religion
where we can indulge in sex and become religionists. This is called Prakrita
Sahajia—materialistic lust.

One should understand what Radha Krishna is. Radha and Krishna display
the pleasure potency of the internal energy of Krishna. That pleasure potency
of Krishna’s internal energy is a most difficult subject matter, unless one
understands what Krishna is. Krishna cannot see any pleasure in this material
world. But He has got that pleasure potency. Because we are part and parcel
Introduction 9

of Krishna, therefore that pleasure potency is within us also. But we are trying
to exhibit that pleasure potency in matter, while Krishna does not. The object
of His pleasure potency is Radharani. That means Krishna exhibits His potency
or His energy as Radharani, and then exchanges loving affairs with Her.
Krishna cannot take pleasure in this external energy. This is very difficult to
understand—but just try: Krishna exhibits His internal energy, His pleasure
potency, as Radharani. That means that Krishna manifests Himself. As He
has so many extensions, so many expansions, so many incarnations; so Radharani is the manifestation of His internal pleasure potency.

Radharani is also Krishna. There is no difference between the energy
and the energetic. Without energy there is no meaning to energetic, and
without the energetic there is no meaning to energy. Similarly, without
Radha there is no meaning to Krishna, and without Krishna there is no meaning
to Radha. Therefore the Vaishnava philosophy first of all worships the internal
pleasure potency of the Supreme Lord. It is always said, “Radha Krishna.”
Although the author is going to explain the intricacies of this pleasure potency,
he first of all utters the name of Radha. Similarly, those who worship the
Name of Narayan first of all utter the name of Lakshmi; those who are worshippers of Lord Rama first of all utter the name of Sita. Sita Rama, Radha
Krishna, Lakshmi Narayan—the potency always first.

Radha and Krishna are One. When Krishna desires to enjoy pleasure
He manifests Himself. The spiritual exchange of love affair is the display of
the internal potency or pleasure potency of Krishna. We say “when” Krishna
desires, although just when He did desire, we cannot say. But we speak in
this way because in conditional life we take it that everything has some beginning. In the Absolute, or spiritual life, there is no beginning; there is no end.
But in order to understand that Radha and Krishna are One, and that They
become divided, that question “When?” automatically comes to be asked.
When Krishna desired to enjoy His pleasure potency, He manifested Himself
in the separate Form of Radharani. Again, when Krishna wanted to understand Himself through the agency of Radha, They became united—and that
unification is called Lord Chaitanya.

Why has Krishna assumed that Form? That will be explained. “What is
the glory of Radha’s love?” Krishna asks. “Why is She so much in love with
Me? What is the special qualification in Me that Radharani is attracted to,
and what is Radharani’s process of loving Me?” He is the Supreme—why
should He be attracted by anyone’s love? He is full in Himself. We search
after the love of a woman because we are imperfect. The love of woman, that
10 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

potency, that pleasure, is absent in me, and therefore I want a woman. But
Krishna is surprised: “Why am I attracted by Radharani? And what is the
special significance in Me that Radharani is so much attached to? Now, when
Radharani feels My love, what is Her feeling?” In order to taste the flavor or
the quality, the essence of that loving affair, Krishna appeared as the Moon
appears in the sea. Just as the Moon was produced by the churning of the sea,
so by churning the spiritual love affairs, the Moon appeared as Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu, whose complexion was just like the Moon. This is figurative
language, but it is the purport of why Chaitanya Mahaprabhu has appeared.
The full significance will be explained in later chapters.

The author of Chaitanya Charitamrita is describing the manifestation of
the Supreme. After offering His respects to Lord Chaitanya, he next offers
them to Nityananda. Who is Nityananda? He now explains. First of all,
Nityananda is manifested as Samkarshan. Samkarshan is the origin of Maha
Vishnu, a form of God. This first manifestation of Krishna is Valaram, and
then Samkarshan; from Samkarshan to Pradyumna: in this way the expansion
takes place. It works in the same way as one candle is the origin, and another
candle is lit from that original and from that another and another—this is
explained in Brahma Samhita: The Supreme Lord Govinda is the Original
Candle, and from that Original Candle many thousands of candles, one after
another, are expanded, and they are called Vishnu. Just as one candle after
another makes a very nice exhibition of light, similarly, Krishna has expanded
Himself into so many lights, and We are also lights. We are smaller lights,
while Vishnu is the bigger light. But they are all Krishna, all expansions.

That Vishnu, when there is a need of material creation, expands Himself
as Maha Vishnu, Who lies down on the Causal Ocean. From His nostrils all
the Universes are breathed out. From that Causal Ocean all the Universes
have sprung up, and this Universe also is floating in that Causal Ocean. Outside
is water. You have seen the picture of Vamanadev when He expanded His
leg up to the covering of the sky of this Universe. There was a hole there,
and through that hole Karana water leaked in; and a little drop is flowing as
the river Ganges. Therefore the Ganges is accepted as the most sacred water
of Vishnu, and is worshipped by all Hindus, from the Himalayas down to the
Bay of Bengal. The Maha Vishnu, lying on the Causal Ocean, is a plenary
expansion of Rama. This Rama, when we say HARE KRISHNA, HARE
RAMA—this Rama means the Samkarshan, Nityananda.

The author of Chaitanya Charitamrita describes what is “beyond this
material expansion.” The cosmic material expansion is called Maya because
Introduction Il

it has no eternal existence. It is sometimes manifested and sometimes not
manifested. Therefore it is called Maya. Krishna Das now says, “beyond this
manifestation.” In the Bhagavad Gita Eighth Chapter, it is explained that there
is another Nature which is eternal, and which is beyond Bakta and Abakta.
Bakta means manifested, and Abakta means unmanifested. This material world
has a manifested aspect and a potential state, which is called non-manifested.
Beyond both the potential non-manifested stage and the manifested stage
there is another, spiritual Nature. We can understand this superior Nature
as the living force. That is described in the Bhagavad Gita. The living force
is manifest in this body: this body is of the inferior Nature, matter. The
superior Nature is the spirit that is moving the world. The symptom of that
superior Nature is consciousness. Similarly, beyond this material Nature
there is another, superior, Nature which is conscious. There everything is
conscious. We cannot imagine that. Here the objects are not conscious. But
in the Spiritual World the table is conscious, the land is conscious, the tree
is conscious—everything is conscious.

Now, you cannot imagine how far this material manifestation is extended.
You have no measurement. Everything is calculated by imagination or by
some imperfect method. But here we are getting information of what lies
beyond this. Those who believe in experimental knowledge may inquire
how it is possible: We cannot calculate how far this Universe is extended,
and we cannot reach even the nearest planet; so how is it that we can obtain
information beyond this material Nature? That which is beyond your conceivable power is called Achintya, inconceivable. What is inconceivable, don’t
argue about. It is useless. How can you? It is inconceivable.

That which is inconceivable to your limited energy, limited sense perception—how can you reach that plane by argumentative logic? Don’t argue.
Then, how is it known? Accept it. The Bhagavad Gita says: “It has to be
understood by the disciplic succession.” Just as Brahma, the original creature,
was given lessons by Krishna, Brahma imparted those lessons to his disciple
Narada, and Narada imparted that knowledge to his disciple, Vyasdeva.
Vyasdeva imparted that knowledge to his disciple, Madhvacharya; Madhvacharya on down to Madhavendra Puri, who imparted the same lesson to Ishwara
Puri. And Ishwara Puri imparted the same lesson to Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.

People may ask that, if Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is Krishna Himself, then
why did He need a Spiritual Master? Of course, He did not need any Spiritual
Master, but just because He was playing Acharya (teaching how to behave
in spiritual life), He accepted a Spiritual Master. Even Krishna accepted a
12 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Spiritual Master. That is the system. If you want to know that which is inconceivable, you must accept the disciplic succession. Because the knowledge is
coming down from the Supreme, down, down, down—it is perfect. Suppose
a hundred generations before, there was something confidential that your
forefather told his son, which has finally been passed down to you. Although
you are not in touch with the direct personality, yet because it is coming
through disciplic succession, the same truth is expressed.

How was Brahma informed of this sort of knowledge? That is also stated
in the Srimad Bhagwatam: The original learned scholar is Brahma; and Krishna,
the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, impressed transcendental knowledge into the heart of Brahma. By the heart. So two processes
of knowledge exist: One process depends upon the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as the Supersoul seated within you. He informs you. And He also
expands Himself as the Spiritual Master. The Guru also informs you.

So in both ways, from within and from without, the information is transmitted. We simply have to receive it. If we receive knowledge in this way,
it doesn’t matter that it is inconceivable. In the Bhagwatam, you will find
much information about the Vaikuntha planetary systems, which are beyond
the material Universe. Just as with Chaitanya Charitamrita, the knowledge
is there, and you simply have to take it. But you have to receive it by the
Parampara system. You cannot approach the Truth, which is inconceivable
to your experimental knowledge. It is not possible. We want to know everything by experimental knowledge. That is foolishness. It is not possible.
According to the Vedic way, sound is evidence. Sound is very important in
Vedic understanding. Sound is evidence, if the sound is pure. In the material
world, also, you understand things thousands of miles away simply by sound
vibration. As soon as you call by telephone or radio, there is sound. In San
Francisco, 3000 miles away, as soon as you receive the sound—“Mr. Suchand-Such speaking’—you understand. The evidence is sound. Where is the
informant, is he standing there before you? No—but as soon as you hear the
sound you know. Sound is the most authoritative evidence. These things are
received by sound vibration.

We have the information that beyond this cosmic manifestation there
are the very extensive Vaikunthas. This material manifestation is only onefourth of the manifestation. There is not only this Universe, but there are
innumerable Universes. Just as there are innumerable planets within this
Universe, so this is only one Cosmos; there are innumerable Universes, and,
all combined together they are one-fourth of the manifestation of the CreaIntroduction 13

tion. The other three-fourths of the manifestation is Vaikuntha Loka, the
Spiritual World. In that Vaikuntha Loka every Narayan has His four expansions: Samkarshan, Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Vasudeva. (That Samkarshan
is Nityananda.) These Universes surround the body of the Supreme; and
Vishnu is Master of this material Nature.

As the husband and wife combine together to create, so Maya is the wife
and the Supreme Maha Vishnu is her Husband. This is also confirmed in the
Bhagavad Gita: “This expansive material Nature is My wife, and all the living
entities are born of Me.” How is Vishnu contacting Maya? That contact is
also described in the Bhagavad Gita: Simply by a glance: “He glanced over the
material Nature and it became impregnated.” This is Spiritual. We must
impregnate by a particular part of our body, but the Supreme Lord, Krishna
or Vishnu, can impregnate any part by any part. Simply by glancing He can
cause conception. The reason why is found in the Brahma Samhita: the spiritual
body of the Supreme Lord is so powerful that any part can perform the duty
of any other part. We can only touch with the hand, but Krishna can touch
you by glancing. We can only see with the eyes, we cannot touch or smell
with our eyes; but Krishna can smell and can also eat with His eyes.

When we offer Prasadam, foodstuffs, to Krishna, we don’t see that He is
eating; but, simply by glancing at the food, He can eat. Simply by seeing.
We have the idea, because we have this mouth, that unless we devour the
whole thing, we cannot eat. But that everything is spiritual—that we cannot
imagine. We see that we are offering to Krishna, and He is not eating. Is it by
our imagination that He is accepting Prasadam? No, it is not like that. Actually,
He is eating, but His eating is different from our eating. Our eating process
will be similar to His when we are completely on the spiritual platform.
There, every part of the body can act for the other parts of the body.

You have seen that picture where Brahma is born from the navel of
Vishnu, Who is lying down. And Vishnu’s energy, Lakshmi, the Goddess
of Fortune, is serving Him, sitting by the side of His leg. Vishnu does not
require Lakshmi to give birth to Brahma. How then can you expect that
there is sex life in the Spiritual World? Sex life here in this material world
is required to produce children, but in the Spiritual World you can produce
children, as many as you like, without any help from a wife. So there is no
sex life there. Vishnu produces Brahma from His navel without the help of
His wife. There are many such instances. This is the inconceivable spiritual
energy. Because we do not experience spiritual energy, we think these are
fictional stories. No. You think that way because you have no conception of
14 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

spiritual energy: it is so powerful that it can do anything and everything.
It has full independence.

From each pore of the body of Maha Vishnu these Universes emanate,
seedlike, and then they develop. They are exhaled when He breathes also.
Just as when a man is diseased the infection is carried by perspiration, by
breathing and by touching: that is a scientific fact. If a man is infected with
smallpox bacteria, you can simply touch his perspiration and become infected.
This occurs even in this material world. So this is all possible. It is not impossible. It simply requires some intellectual capacity to understand. From Maha
Vishnu’s Spiritual Body so many Universes emanate. When He exhales they
come out, and when He inhales the whole thing is gone. This is the material
Universe. Just imagine: the existence of each and every Universe is contained
in one breath of Vishnu. That is stated in the Brahma Samhita. We have calculated the age of Brahma, but actually you cannot conceivably calculate
even one day of Maha Vishnu. 4,200,000,000 years is only twelve hours of
Brahma. And the whole life of Brahma is just within the period of one breath
of Maha Vishnu. Just consider what is the breathing power of the Supreme
Lord. That Maha Vishnu is the plenary partial representation of Krishna.

Next comes the Garbodakshayee Vishnu, from Whom Brahma is born.
Within that lotus stem from this Vishnu’s navel there are so many Universes.
And just as the mother increases the family members, similarly Brahma was
first created by Garbodakshayee Vishnu, and Brahma created the whole
human society, animal society—everything. Maha Vishnu’s plenary expansion
is Garbodakshayee Vishnu, and His plenary expansion is Kshirodakshayee
Vishnu. In this way, in each and every Universe, there is one Garbodakshayee
Vishnu and one Kshirodakshayee Vishnu. That Kshirodakshayee Vishnu lies
on the milk ocean, within this Universe, and He is the Controller and the
Maintainer of the Universe. Brahma is the Creator, Vishnu is Maintainer,
and when it will be required to annihilate the Universe, then Shiva will
come and finish everything.

So far, Krishna Das Kaviraj has discussed Lord Chaitanya and Lord
Nityananda, and now he describes Adwaita Acharya. In our morning prayers
we sing the Names of Lord Chaitanya and His Associates:

Sri Krishna Chaitanya, Prabhu Nityananda, Sri Adwaita, Gadadhar, Srivas

adi Gour bhaktavrinda.

They are all expansions of the same One. So Adwaita Acharya is an expansion
of Maha Vishnu. You have seen the picture of Maha Vishnu lying on the
Causal Ocean and breathing out innumerable universes. That Maha Vishnu
Introduction 15

is incarnated as Adwaita. This Adwaita Acharya is the incarnation of that
Maha Vishnu, Who creates this material world through the agency of the
material energy. Therefore Adwaita Acharya is also the Lord, or an expansion
of the Lord. Why is He called Adwaita? Adwaita means nondual. His name is
such because He is non-different from the Supreme Lord. And He is called
Acharya, teacher, because He disseminated Krishna Consciousness. In this
He is just like Chaitanya Mahaprabhu—although He is Sri Krishna Himself,
He appeared as a devotee to teach how to love Krishna. So Adwaita Acharya
appeared just to distribute the knowledge of Krishna Consciousness. He is
also the incarnation of a devotee.

Krishna is manifested in five different expansions, and Himself and all
of His other Associates appear as devotees of the Supreme Lord. Some of them
are like Adwaita Acharya—He is an incarnation of Maha Vishnu. And one is
known as Bhakta Nityananda Prabhu, Who also appeared as a devotee. So
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is the Source of energy for all devotees. If we take
shelter of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu for Krishna Consciousness, it becomes very
easy. There is a very nice song: “My dear Lord Chaitanya, please have mercy
upon me, because there is no one who is such a merciful Lord as You are.
You have descended to deliver all fallen souls, but You will not find a more
fallen soul than me; therefore, my claim to be delivered is most urgent.
Because Your mission is to deliver the fallen souls, and nobody is more fallen
than me, I have my priority.”

Now the author begins his obeisances to Krishna. The author, Krishna
Das, was an inhabitant of Vrindaban. Some incidents from his life will be
described in the Fifth Chapter of the Chaitanya Charitamrita. He was a great
devotee. He had been living in Katwa, a small subdivisional city in the
district of Bardwan in Bengal, with his family who also worshipped Radha
Krishna, when there was some misunderstanding—not on family matters,
but about devotional service. In the midst of this misunderstanding, Nityananda
Prabhu advised him in a dream to leave his home and go to Vrindaban,.
Although he was very old, he started out that very night, and came to live
at Vrindaban. He met some of the Goswamis there. His tomb remains in the
temple where I live in Vrindaban. This is Krishna Das Kaviraj Goswami,
the author of Chaitanya Charitamrita. This Chaitanya Charitamrita was requested
by the devotees of Vrindaban. He began at a very old age, but by the grace
of Lord Chaitanya he finished this nice, most authoritative book on Chaitanya’s
philosophy and life: The Character and Activities of the Eternal Living Force.

Because he lived in Vrindaban, there are three temples that are very im16 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

portant: One temple is Madanmohan, another is Govinda, and the third is
Gopinath. These temples are the ones visited by all pilgrims. About 300 or
400 years after the construction of these temples, with the development of
Vrindaban city, many other temples were built, but when Krishna Das Goswami was living, there were not so many. The only principle temples were
these three—Madanmohan, Govinda, and Gopinath. Because he was a resident
of Vrindaban, he must offer his respects to the deities. And his first offering
is respect. He considers himself as a layman and very slow to make progress.
He asks God’s favor: “My progress in spiritual life is very slow, so I am asking
Your help.”

He is offering his obeisances first to Vigraha. Vigraha, according to devotional service, is the deity Who can help us in dovetailing ourselves with
Krishna Consciousness. Our first business is to know Krishna, and to know
our relationship with Krishna. To know Krishna is to know oneself, and to
know oneself means to know one’s relationship with Krishna. What is our
relationship with Krishna? That is learned by worshipping Madanmohan
Vigraha. Therefore, Krishna Das Goswami first establishes his relationship
with Madanmohan Vigraha. When one is established in relationship with
Krishna, then he begins his function. The functional deity is Govinda.

He offers his obeisances to Govinda, Who resides in Vrindaban. Vrindaban
is the place where there are desire trees. Actually, in the Spiritual World of
Vrindaban, it is explained, that the land is of touchstone and the trees are
desire trees. Desire tree means whatever you want you can have. And the
Lord is herding spiritual cows, known as Surabhi cows. And He is worshipped
by hundreds and thousands of Gopis, who are all Goddesses of Fortune.
When Krishna descends, this same Vrindaban descends. Just as when a Governor or a President goes to someplace, all his entourage and paraphernalia,
secretary, military—everything goes there with him. Similarly, when Krishna
comes, His land also comes. Therefore Vrindaban is considered to be not in

.the material world. And therefore devotees take shelter in Vrindaban.
Vrindaban in India is considered the replica of the original Vrindaban; and so
one should accept the trees of Vrindaban as being the same Kalpa briksha,
desire trees. Now, one may say of the Vrindaban trees, “Oh, we can ask anything?” But first of all you should become a devotee. You simply cannot go
and test them to see whether these trees are desire trees. Actually, when the
Goswamis were there, the Kalpa briksha was there. The Goswamis were each
under one tree for one night, and all their wants were satisfied. So how could
they live that way unless the trees were so nice as desire trees? For the comIntroduction 17

mon man it seems very wonderful that the Goswamis could simply live underneath one tree one night, and the next tree another night, and have everything
they needed. But it is all possible. As we make progress in our devotional
service, we can realize this.

There is another devotee, an Acharya, who describes Vrindaban: “When
my mind becomes cleansed of all dirty hankering for material enjoyment,
then I shall be able to see Vrindaban!’’ So Vrindaban is actually experienced
by persons who have finished with material enjoyment. Everything is spiritual.
This becomes revealed. We cannot challenge it. As you become more Krishna
conscious, as you become more advanced, everything is revealed to you.

Actually, Vrindaban is as good as the Spiritual Vrindaban, and therefore
Krishna Das Kaviraj Goswami says that underneath one of the desire trees
of Vrindaban there is a nice throne decorated with valuable jewels on which
Radharani and Krishna are seated. And His dear friends and the Gopis are
all serving Them: somebody is singing, and somebody is dancing, somebody
is offering betel nuts and refreshment, somebody is decorating with flowers.
In this way there are 108 Gopis who are the constant companions of Sri
Radha and Krishna. That scene is described in Chaitanya Charitamrita.

In India it is still a fashion of recreation to sit on a swinging throne, and,
if it is moving, it is very refreshing. In each and every home they have a hanging throne, and when a man comes home from the office, if it is practical, it is
moved for some time and he becomes refreshed. So, similarly, the same system
prevails, especially in the month of Sravam, July, when there is the function
called Julun. During Julun, in all the houses—not only of Vrindaban but all
over India—the people hang thrones. In every house and village they place
Krishna and Radha and decorate them with flowers and move the throne and
offer dancing and Kirtan. If you like you can introduce that system here.
Julun goes on for one month, the temples are decorated and thousands of
visitors come as spectators. Generally, people go to Vrindaban at that time.
Krishna and Radha are seated on the throne, surrounded by His friends.

“T offer my respects to Radha and Krishna,” Krishna Das says. This Radha
and Krishna deity shows us how to serve Radha and Krishna. Madanmohan is
simply to establish that “I am Your eternal servant.” Now, in Govinda, there
is actually acceptance of service. Therefore it is the functional deity.

The next deity is Gopinath. The author offers blessings here to the audience
in the Name of Gopinath, the Master or Proprietor of the Gopis, Who attracted
all the Gopis by the sound of His flute, because He wanted to dance with them.
In the Tenth Canto of Srimad Bhagwatam this is described: Some of the Gopis
18 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

are sleeping somewhere with their husbands, some are taking milk, some
are caring for their children—they were all busy young girls. But as soon as
they heard Krishna’s flute, they at once left their places.

All these Gopis were childhood friends. In India the girls are married by
the age of twelve years, and the boys are married at not less than eighteen
years. Krishna was not married at that time as He was a Boy fifteen or sixteen
years old. So, He called these girlfriends from their homes, although they
were married, and they used to come and dance together. That is called the
Rasa Dance. Hearing the transcendental sound of the flute, as soon as He
would sound the vibration, all the Gopis would come and join Him at a particular place, which was called Bonsibat. If you go to Vrindaban you will
find that Bonsibat still exists. It is a very sanctified place, and pilgrims go
there and offer their respects. Believe it or not, it is said that there are the
same trees that were there at the time of Krishna. That is not so astonishing,
however, because I saw some redwood trees in Muir Forest in San Francisco
which were said to be 7000 years old. So it is not impossible.

Krishna advented 5000 years ago, and if some of the trees are still standing,
it is not unprecendented, because here also there are very old trees. The particular tree under which Krishna used to call the Gopis to come and dance
the Rasa Dance at night with Him—that tree is still there. That is described
in Chaitanya Charitamrita.

“May that Gopinath, the Master of the Gopis, Krishna, bless you. May
you become blessed by Gopinath.” Gopinath is called for blessing because
He used to attract the Gopis. As He attracted the Gopis by the sweet sound
of His flute, so the author desires that He may also attract your mind by that
transcendental vibration.
TEACHINGS OF LORD CHAITANYA

 
 

Rupa Goswami and His Younger Brother Anupam (Ballava) Meeting

Lord Chaitanya at Prayag (Allahabad)
i
Liha | =
Se ee ee ee ee ee a
CHAPTER ONE

 

Teachings to Rupa Goswami

Srila Rupa Goswami, the younger brother of Sanatan Goswami, went to
Prayag, the modern Allahabad, with his younger brother Ballabha, and when
they heard that Lord Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was staying there, both of
them became very much pleased. They went to see Lord Chaitanya and saw
that the Lord was going to visit the temple of Bindumadhava. While the
Lord was going, chanting and dancing, thousands of people were following
Him and some of them were crying, some were laughing, some were dancing,
and some singing. Some of them were fallen on the ground, offering obeisances to the Lord. And all of them were roaring with the Holy Name of
Krishna, Krishna. Prayag is situated on the confluence of the Rivers Ganges
and Yamuna. And it is said that in spite of its being at the junction of two
rivers, it remained without being overflooded until the appearance of Lord
Chaitanya, when the city was overflooded by the tide of love of Krishna.

The two brothers, Rupa Goswami and Ballabha, saw the great crowd and
the wonderful scene, staying aloof in an uncrowded place. The Lord was

21
22 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

dancing, raising His two hands, and roaring with the words, Hari Bol! Hari
Bol! All the people assembled there were astonished, struck with wonder at
the Lord’s activity, and it is very difficult to describe the actual situation. The
Lord was acquainted with one Deccanist Brahmin, and the Lord came back
to the Brahmin’s house to accept prasadam. While Lord Chaitanya was sitting
at the house of this Deccanist Brahmin, the two brothers, Rupa Goswami and
Ballabha, arrived there. From a distant place they fell down on the ground to
offer obeisances, and were chanting many Sanskrit verses from Scriptures.
The Lord saw Rupa Goswami in front of Him, thus offering obeisances. He
was very much pleased, and asked him: “My dear Rupa, please get up.” The Lord informed Rupa Goswami about the causeless mercy of Krishna
on him, because Krishna had delivered him from the materialistic way of
life which is based simply on pound-shilling-pence.

The Lord accepted the two brothers as His own devotees, and cited one
verse from the Scriptures which states that a Brahmin who has studied the
four Vedas may not be His devotee, but a pure devotee coming from a very
low family may be accepted by Him. The Lord then embraced the two
brothers, and by His causeless mercy He touched His Lotus Feet on their
heads. When they were so blessed both the brothers came to offer their prayers
to the Lord in their own words. The prayers said that Lord Sri Krishna Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Who is Krishna Himself, has assumed the Form of fair
complexion, Gouranga, and is the most munificent Incarnation of Krishna,
because He is distributing love of Krishna. Srila Rupa Goswami also quoted
one verse which was later on found m the book, Govinda Lilamrita. The verse
says as follows: “Let me be surrendered unto the Lotus Feet of Sri Krishna
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Who is the greatest, most merciful Personality of
Godhead, and Who delivers those merged in ignorance, and offers them the
highest gift of love of Krishna, and thus makes them mad after Krishna Consciousness.”

After this incident the Lord was invited by Ballabha Bhatta to the other side
of the Ganges, and He went there. But wherever He used to go, Rupa Goswami would follow Him, and was staying with Him. The Lord felt inconvenience in crowded places, and therefore He asked Rupa Goswami to
accompany Him to the bank of the Ganges known as Dasaswamedhaghat.
And for ten days He instructed Rupa Goswami about the Truth of Krishna,
the principles of devotional service, and the transcendental mellows. All was
described in full detail, so that in future he could distribute the science of
Krishna in his book, Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu. Srila Rupa Goswami has desTeachings to Rupa Goswami 23

cribed this incident in the first verse of Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu which speaks
about the causeless mercy of the Lord upon him. The Supreme Personality
of Godhead is cognizant, All-Powerful, and, by His causeless mercy, He
empowers a living entity to receive His mercy. People in general, being under
the spell of conditional life, are averse to devotional service and Krishna
Consciousness. They are unaware of the principles of Krishna Consciousness:
namely, one’s eternal relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
the ultimate goal of life, which is to return back to Home, back to Godhead;
and the process of returning to the spiritual world. These things are unknown
to the conditioned soul. Lord Chaitanya, out of His causeless mercy, instructed
Rupa Goswami on the principles of devotional service, and later on Rupa
Goswami distributed to the people in general the science of devotional service.

Srila Rupa Goswami has described Lord Chaitanya in the Prologue to
Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu as follows: “I am offering my respectful obeisances
unto the Lotus Feet of the Personality of Godhead, known as Lord Chaitanyadeva because, inspired by Him, I am feeling it within my heart to write
something about devotional service. Therefore, I am engaged in writing this
great book on the science of devotion, known as Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu.”

Lord Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu instructed Rupa Goswami continually
for ten days, and He began His teaching as follows: “My Dear Rupa, the
science of devotional service is just like a great ocean, and it is not possible to
show you all the length and breadth of the great ocean. But I shall simply
try to explain about the nature of the ocean by just taking a drop out of it;
and you can thus taste it and understand what is that ocean of devotional
service.”

Within this Brahmanda, or Universe, there are innumerable living entities,
and according to their own fruitive activities they are transmigrating from
one species of life to another, and from one planet to another. In this way their
encagement in material existence is ‘being continued since time immemorial.
The living entities are atomic parts and parcels of the Supreme Spirit. There
is, however, a measurement for the length and breadth of the atomic spiritual
spark. It is said in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Eighty-seventh Chapter,
36th verse, that if you divide the tip of a hair into 100 parts, and again if you
divide one part of that into another 100 parts, such 1/10,oooth part of the tip
of a hair is the length and breadth of the individual soul. This is also confirmed in the Vedas, in the Svetasvataro Upanishad.

This atomic magnitude of the individual living entity is again described
in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Eleventh Canto, Sixteenth Chapter, 11th verse, as
24 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

follows: (This is a speech given by one of the four Kumaras, known as Sananda,
on the occasion of performing a great sacrifice;) He said, O Supreme Truth!
if the living entities were not infinitesimal living sparks of the Supreme Spirit,
then each minute spark would have been all-pervading, and there would be
no necessity of its being controlled by superior power. But if the constitution
of the living entity is accepted as being the minute part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord, then automatically he becomes a controlled living entity
under supreme energy or power. This is his constitutional position. Therefore,
if he remains as he is created in that natural position, he can attain full freedom.
As such, if somebody by mistake calculates that his constitutional position is
equal to the constitutional position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
then he becomes contaminated by the doctrine of non-duality and his efforts
in transcendental life are without any effect.

The Lord continues His teaching, saying that there are two kinds of living
entities: one is called eternally liberated, and the other is called eternally
conditioned. Out of the eternally conditioned living entities, again they are
divided into two classes, namely, the moving and the non-moving entities.
Those who cannot move, who, like trees, for example, are standing in one
place, are called non-moving entities. And those who are moving, such as
birds and beasts, are called Jangam, or moving entities. These moving entities
are also divided into three: there are the tiryak, or the birds: some of them can
fly in the sky, and swim on the water, as well as walk on the land. Besides
this tiryak, there are aquatics; and there are animals and human beings, who
are moving on the land. Out of the many millions and trillions of living
entities on the land, the species of human beings are very few. Out of that
small quantity of human beings there are many who are actually without any
advancement in spiritual science, and are without cleanliness in their habits,
without any faith in the existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and are simply like animals. They may be deducted from the human society
or from the civilized society of human beings.

We shall hardly find a few human beings who believe in the Scriptures
or in the existence of God, or in good behavior for the human being. Such
believers are known as Aryans, or those who believe in advancing in spiritual
life. Out of such persons believing in the Scriptures and in the advancement of
human civilization, there are two classes of men, who are known as the righteous and the unrighteous. Of those who are righteous, most execute fruitive
activities. That means they prefer to perform righteous activities in order to
derive some good result from them for sense gratification. Out of many,
Teachings to Rupa Goswami 25

many such persons who are engaged in good righteous activities for sense
gratification some of them come to know about the Absolute Truth, and they
are called Jnanins, meaning persons who are seeking after the Absolute Truth,
or philosophers—empiric philosophers. Out of many hundreds and thousands
of such empiric philosophers some actually become liberated. This liberation
means that theoretically one can understand that a living entity is not made of
any of the material elements; that he is spirit soul, different from matter.
Simply by understanding this doctrine, even theoretically, one may be called
mukta, or liberated; but actually a mukta, or liberated soul, is he who understands his constitutional position as part and parcel eternal servitor of the
Lord. Such liberated souls, if they are engaged with faith and devotion in the
service of the Lord, are called Krishna-bhaktas, or Krishna conscious persons.

These Krishna conscious persons are free from all material desires. Those
who are liberated theoretically simply know that the living entity is not made
of any material element. Although they may be classified amongst the liberated
souls, they have desire. They have the desire to become one with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Such persons are very much attached to the ritual
performance of the Vedic injunctions, and to righteous activities, in order to
enjoy material welfare. And even when some of them are out of material
enjoyment, they want enjoyment in the spiritual world, to merge into the
existence of the Supreme Lord. And some of them are also desirous of getting
the perfection of mystic powers, known as the Yoga principles. So long as
all these desires are within the heart of a person, he cannot understand the
nature of pure devotional service, and on account of being agitated by such
desires, he is not peaceful. So long as there is any desire for material perfection,
he cannot be at peace. The devotees of Lord Krishna are not desirous of material
achievement, and as such they are the only peaceful persons within this material
world. This is confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Sixth Canto, Fourteenth
Chapter, 4th verse: It is said there as follows: “O great sage, out of many
millions of liberated persons, and persons who have achieved success in mystic
Yoga powers, one who is completely devoted to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and is therefore very peaceful is very rarely to be found.”

The Lord continued to explain that in this way many thousands and
millions of living entities are wandering within this material world, and some
of them, by the grace of Lord Krishna and the Spiritual Master, can get the
seed of devotional service. The pious or religious man is generally inclined to
worship the deities in various temples and if by chance he offers obeisances
and worshipful respects to Lord Vishnu, even without his knowledge, and he
26 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

receives the favor of a Vaishnava, a devotee of the Lord, at that time he accumulates some asset in the matter of approaching the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This is very plainly understood from the Srimad Bhagwatam in the
matter of the life of the great sage Narada. Narada got the chance of serving
the Vaishnavas in his previous life, and thus he was favored by the devotees
of the Lord, with the result that he became a great sage, as he is known—
Narada Muni. ,

The Vaishnavas or devotees are generally very compassionate toward the
conditioned souls, and even being uninvited by any conditioned soul, a
devotee goes from door to door to enlighten people from the darkness of
nescience, and to inject in them knowledge in various ways about their constitutional position of being engaged in devotional service, or Krishna Consciousness. Such persons are devotees empowered by the Lord, and they are
especially empowered to distribute devotional consciousness, or Krishna Consciousness, to the people in general. They are known as authorized Spiritual
Masters. It is just by the mercy of such an authorized Spiritual Master that a
conditioned soul gets the seed of devotional service. The causeless mercy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is first appreciated when one is in touch
with a bona fide Spiritual Master who can enlighten the conditioned soul
to the highest position of devotional life. Therefore, Lord Chaitanya said that
by the mercy of the Spiritual Master, one can achieve the causeless mercy of
the Lord; and by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can
get the mercy of the bona fide Spiritual Master.

By such mercy from the Spiritual Master and Krishna one receives the
seed of devotional service, and one has to sow the seed in the field of his
heart just as a gardener sows the seed of a valuable tree. After sowing the seed
one has to pour water in the form of chanting and hearing the Holy Name of
the Supreme Lord, or by taking part in the discussion of the science of devotional service in the society of pure devotees. When the plant of devotional
service sprouts up from the seed of devotion, it begins to grow freely, and
when it is full grown it then surpasses the length and breadth of this Universe
and enters into the transcendental position of the spiritual world, where
everything is effulgent in the Brahmajyoti, and the plant penetrates even the
Brahmajyoti, and then gradually enters into the planet known as Goloka
Vrindaban, and there the plant takes shelter at the Lotus Feet of Krishna.
That is the ultimate goal of devotional service. After attaining such a position,
the plant produces fruit which is known as the fruit of love of Godhead. The
Teachings to Rupa Goswami 27

devotee or the transcendental gardener has, however, to pour water on the
plant daily, in regulation, by the process of chanting and hearing. Without
chanting and hearing, or without pouring ‘water on the root of the plant,
there is every chance of the plant becoming dried up.

The Lord continued to say that there is another source of danger while
pouring water on the root of the plant. When the plant of devotional service
grows, some animal may come and eat the whole thing or destroy the plant,
just like an ordinary plant is also destroyed by the animal. And when the
green leaves of the plant are taken away by some animal, the plant generally
dries up. So one has to take precaution about the plant of devotional service
not being disturbed by other animals. An animal is used to refer to offenses
unto the pure devotee of the Lord, which is called Vaishnava Aparadh. This
offense unto the pure devotee is compared to a mad elephant: As a mad
elephant, if it enters into the garden, causes tremendous loss to the plants
and trees, so in the devotional discharge, if there is any offense unto the feet
of the pure devotee, it creates havoc in the matter of advancing in devotional
service. Therefore, one has to defend the plant by fencing it properly; one
has to take care, while discharging devotional service, not to commit any
offense to the pure devotees. If one is cautious in the matter of not committing
offenses unto the pure devotees, then the plant of devotional service is properly
protected.

Offenses are of ten kinds, and they are also known as offenses unto the
Holy Name: The first offense is to blaspheme great devotees who have tried to
spread the Glories of the Holy Name all over the world. If one is unnecessarily
envious of a devotee who is trying to spread the Holy Name all over the
world, in execution of the order of his Spiritual Master, such a rascal is the
greatest offender at the Feet of the Holy Name. The Holy Name of Krishna
is non-different from Krishna, and Lord Krishna cannot tolerate such offenses
as to decry a pure devotee who is spreading His Holy Name all over the world.
The second offense is to deny that Lord Vishnu is the Absolute Truth; There
is no difference between His Name, Quality, Form, Pastimes, and Activities;
but one who sees a difference in these different functions of the Supreme Lord
is also an offender. In the same way, the Lord being supreme, nobody is equal
to or greater than the Supreme Lord. Therefore, if anybody thinks that the
Lord or His Name are equal to the personality of some demigod, he is also an
offender. Such a conception of equality between the Supreme Lord and the
demigods is not very congenial to the performance of devotional service.
28 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

The third offense is to consider the bona fide Spiritual Master as one of the
common men. The fourth offense is to blaspheme Vedic literature and the
corollaries of Vedic literature, the Puranas. The fifth offense is to consider the
Glories of the Holy Name as an exaggeration. The sixth offense is to imagine
a perverted meaning of the Holy Name. The seventh offense is to commit
sinful activities on the strength of chanting the Holy Name. It is understood
that by chanting the Holy Name one gets freed from sinful reactions, but that
does not mean that one should perversely act sinfully on the strength of his
chanting the Holy Name of the Lord. That is the greatest offense. The eighth
offense is to consider that religious ritualistic performances, austerity or
renunciation or the performance of sacrifices are on an equal level with chanting
the Holy Name. Chanting of the Holy Name is as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and other pious activities may be a means to approach the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but when they are employed for some
material achievement they are called offensive. The ninth offense is that the
Glories of the Holy Name of God may not be preached to a faithless person,
and to speak about the Glories of the Holy Name unto such persons is also
another offense. The tenth and last offense is to maintain material attachment
even after hearing and chanting the Holy Name of God. The idea is that by
chanting the Holy Name without any offense, one may be elevated to the
liberated condition. And the liberated condition means that one gets freedom
from all kinds of material attachment: so if it is found that a chanter of the
Holy Name still has material attachment, then that is called an offense.

When the plant of devotional service is growing, there is still another
chance of disturbance. Along with the growth of the plant of devotional
service there are other plants also growing. They are material desires. When
one is advanced in devotional service, it is natural that many persons will come
to the devotee for becoming his disciples, and will offer him some material
gains. So if a person becomes attracted by the increased number of disciples
and the material conveniences offered by the disciples, and forgets his duty as
a bona fide Spiritual Master, that is another disturbance in the growth of the
plant of devotional service. It may be that, by taking advantage of material
convenience, one becomes addicted to enjoy the material comforts of life.

Another disadvantage is to desire liberation. Another disadvantage is to be
neglectful of the restrictions or prohibitions. The prohibitions are mentioned
in the authorized Scriptures: one should not indulge in the association of
woman or illicit sex life, one should not indulge in intoxication, one should
not eat anything other than Krishna prasadam (food offered to Krishna), and
Teachings to Rupa Goswami 29

one should not take part in gambling. These are the restrictions for devotional
service, and if one does not follow these principles strictly then there may be
a severe disturbance in the discharge of devotional service.

Another disturbing element is to aspire after material name and fame by
discharging devotional service. If one is not particularly careful, then by the
process of watering the plant of devotional service, other unnecessary plants,
as described above, may grow, and that may hamper the progress of devotional
service. The idea is that, by the watering process, these unnecessary plants
grow very luxuriantly and the gardener does not see the impediments offered
to the main plant of devotional service. It is the duty of the neophyte devotee
to cut out all the unnecessary plants grown by the watering process. In other
words, if one is careful against the growth of unnecessary plants, then the main
plant grows luxuriantly and reaches the ultimate goal, the planet known as
Goloka Vrindaban. To reach the ultimate goal, the Goloka Vrindaban planet,
is the real result of devotional service, the real fruit grown of the plant of
devotional service. When the living entity engaged in such devotional service
relishes that fruit of love of Godhead, then he forgets all other ritualistic
activities, religiousness for improvements in economic conditions, satisfaction
of the senses, and the desire to become one with the Supreme Lord by merging
into His effulgence.

There are many phases of spiritual knowledge and transcendental bliss,
such as performance of the ritualistic sacrifices recommended in the Vedas,
the execution of austerities and pious duties, and the practice of mystic Yoga.
They have their different respective results to be enjoyed by the performer,
but all these results may appear to be very glittering only so long as one is
not elevated to the transcendental loving service of the Lord. There is a nice
comparison in this connection: that a person bitten by a serpent remains
unconscious so long as there is no smelling of the particular type of medicine
recommended. As soon as the bitten person smells that particular type of
medicine, however, he at once becomes conscious, and no longer can he
remain unconscious by the poisonous effects.

Love of Godhead can be awakened from the dormant position by executing
pure devotional service. And what is that devotional service? What are its
symptoms? These were all described by Lord Chaitanya to Rupa Goswami:

In the matter of pure devotional service, there cannot be any other desire
than to become advanced in Krishna Consciousness. In Krishna Consciousness
there is no scope for worshipping any demigods, or any other Form of Krishna, or to indulge in speculative empiric philosophy, or to be engaged in
30 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

fruitive activities. One should be freed from all these contaminations. One
should accept only favorable things for keeping the body and soul together,
not for increasing the demands of the body. Only the bare necessities of the
body should be accepted, and putting the bodily necessities second, one
should primarily cultivate Krishna Consciousness by chanting the Holy Name
of God. Pure devotional service means to engage all the senses that we have
in the service of the Lord. At the present moment our senses are all designated
because the body is designated. So we think that this body belongs to a particular society or a particular country or a particular family: that is the designative understanding of the body; and similarly the senses belong to the
body, and if the senses act under such a designative concept of life, familyWise, society-wise, or nation-wise, then one cannot cultivate Krishna Consciousness. The senses must be purified. One should purely understand that
he belongs to Krishna, his life belongs to Krishna, his identity is eternal
servitorship to Krishna—and in this way if one engages his senses in the service
of the Lord, that is called pure devotional service.

A pure devotee accepts transcendental loving service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but does not accept any kinds of liberation for his
personal sense gratification. It is stated in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Third Canto,
Twenty-ninth Chapter, verses 10-12, as follows: Lord Kapiladeva explains
in those verses about the pure nature of devotional service: that as soon as a
pure devotee hears the Glories and transcendental Qualities of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Who is seated in everyone's heart, at once his mind
flows towards the Lord, as the water of the Ganges flows down towards the
sea. Such spontaneous attraction of the devotee’s mind to the service of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the significance of pure devotional service.
Devotional service, engagement in the service of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead without any cause, and without being hampered by any material
impediment, is called pure devotion. The pure devotee does not desire to live
in the same planet with the Personality of Godhead, he does not desire the
same opulence as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and he does not
desire to have the same form as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He
does not desire to live along with Him side by side, neither does he desire
at any time to merge into the existence of the Supreme Person, even if these
things are offered by God to the devotee. The thing is that a devotee is so
much absorbed in the transcendental loving service of the Lord that he has
no time to think of any other benefit beyond his engagement. Just as an
ordinary materialistic businessman, when he is absorbed in his business, does
not think of any other thing, so a pure devotee, when he is engaged in the
Teachings to Rupa Goswami 31

pure devotional service of the Lord, does not think of anything beyond that
engagement.

By these symptoms alone one can be understood to be elevated to the
topmost position of devotional service. And it is with such transcendental
loving service alone that one can surpass the influence of Maya, and can relish
pure love of Godhead. So long as one has the desire for material benefit, or for
liberation, which are called the two witches of allurement, one cannot relish
the taste of transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord.

There are three stages of devotional service: the first stage is called the
beginner's cultivation stage, and the second is called the realization of the
service, and the third, the supreme stage, is called attainment of love of Godhead. There are nine different methods for cultivating devotional service,
such as hearing, chanting, remembering, etc. All these processes are employed
in the neophyte stage of cultivation. If one is engaged in the matter of chanting
and hearing with devotion and faith, then gradually his material misgivings
become vanquished. Gradually his faith in devotional service increases more
and more, and such stages assure him a higher perfectional position. Thus,
one becomes firmly fixed, increases the taste for it, becomes attached to it,
and feels an ecstasy which is called the preliminary stage of love of Godhead.
Attainment of ecstasy is produced by execution of the cultivation of devotional
service. Such attainment, when still more developed by that same process
of hearing and chanting, gradually becomes thickened, and it assumes the
name of love of Godhead.

In the stage of transcendental love of God, there are further developments,
which are known as transcendental affection, emotion, ecstasy, and extreme,
intense attachment. These are technically known as raga, anuraga, bhava,
mahabhava. These are technical terms. The process is exemplified by the
gradual thickness of sugarcandy juice. Sugarcandy juice in the first stage is
liquid; and when by evaporation it becomes thicker and thicker, it becomes
molasses, then granules, then sugar, then rock candy, and so on. These are
different stages of the liquid sugar juice, and similarly there are different
stages of the development of transcendental love for the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.

When one is situated on the transcendental platform, that stage is called
steady. Unless one is situated on the transcendental platform, the practice or
love of Godhead may not be steady. One may fall down. But when one is
situated on the transcendental platform he becomes steady, and there is no
fear of falling down. This stage of understanding is technically called sthaibhava.

There are still further developments stepping forward from the position of
32 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

sthaibhava, and these are called vibhava, anubhava, satwik, and byabhibhachary;
and when these four ingredients are added to the steadfast position of pure
transcendental life, that is called exchange of rasa or transcendental flavor.
This exchange of loving reciprocation between the lover and the beloved is
generally called Krishna-bhakti-rasa, the transcendental taste of exchanging
loving sentiments between the devotee and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. But we must know that this development of the transcendental
loving exchange of flavors, stands on the steadfast position of sthaibhava, as
explained before. The basic principle of vibhava is sthaibhava, and the other
activities are auxilliary assistants for the development of transcendental love.

The ecstasy of transcendental love has two components, the context, and
the cause of the excitement. The context is also divided into two parts: the
subject and the object: The exchange of devotional service is the subject, and
Krishna is the Object. And the transcendental Qualities of Krishna are the causes
of excitement. That means that a devotee becomes excited to serve the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Krishna, being enamoured by the transcendental
Qualities of Krishna. The Mayavadi philosophers say that the Absolute Truth
is without specific qualities, and the Vaishnava philosophers say that being
without qualities, (nirguna) means that the Absolute Truth has no material
qualities, but that the spiritual qualities are so great and so enchanting that
even liberated persons become attracted by the Supreme Lord. This fact is
very nicely explained in the atmarama verse of Srimad Bhagwatam: those who
are already situated in self-realization are also attracted by the transcendental
Qualities of Krishna. That means Krishna's Qualities are not material—they
are pure and simple transcendental qualities.

The highest stage of ecstasy can be divided into thirteen transcendental
activities, which are as follows: 1. dancing, 2. rolling on the floor, 3. singing,
4. clapping, 5. bristling of the body, 6. thundering, 7. yawning 8. breathing,
9. forgetting social conventions, 10. throwing down saliva, 11. laughing 12.
headache, 13. coughing. All these thirteen symptoms do not awake simultaneously or at one time, but they act according to the exchange of transcendental flavor. Sometimes one symptom is prominent and at other times
the other symptom is prominent. Transcendental flavor is also divided into
five. Principally, the initial stage is called santa rati, appreciation of the greatness
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by persons who are liberated from the
material contamination, but not exactly engaged in transcendental loving
service. They are on the appreciative neutral stage.

The second stage is when a person appreciates that he is everlastingly
Teachings to Rupa Goswami 33

subordinate to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and he is everlastingly
dependant on the causeless mercy of the Supreme Person. At that time there
is an awakening of natural affection, as a grownup son becomes attracted
with the father’s benediction. At that stage a living entity wants to serve the
Supreme Personality of Godhead instead of being engaged in the service of
Maya, Illusion. This stage is called dasya rati.

The next developed stage of transcendental love is called sakhya rati.
Here one associates with the Supreme on an equal level with love and respect.
That stage is further developed in the matter of joking and in exchange of
different relaxations, by laughing, and so forth. This is called fraternity with the
Personality of Godhead without any bondage. Practically, at that stage one
forgets his inferior position as a living entity, although he has the greatest
respect for the Supreme Person.

When the transcendental flavor or taste of fraternity is further developed,
it is called vatsalya rati, filial affection. At that time the living entity tries to be
the parent of God. Instead of the Lord being worshipped, the living entity as
a parent of the Supreme Person becomes the object of worship for the Supreme
Person. Then the Lord depends on the mercy of such pure devotees. This is
called vatsalya rati. The Lord puts Himself under the control of the devotee
for being brought up nicely. Such a devotee attains to the position of embracing
the Supreme Personality of Godhead or kissing His Head. These are developments of parental filial affection for the Supreme Lord.

The next developed stage is called madhurya rati, or the transcendental
exchange of tastes between the lover and the beloved in conjugal love. At
this stage of loving affairs the damsels of Braja and Krishna glanced over one
another in conjugal love. In that stage of transcendental loving service there is
an exchange of glancing and a movement of the eyebrows and an exchange of
nice pleasing words and attractive smiling between one another. Besides the
five primary reciprocations of flavor there are seven secondary reciprocations,
consisting of laughing, wonderful vision, chivalry, pitiableness, anger, ghastliness, and devastation. Bhisma, for example exchanged with Krishna in the
transcendental flavor of chivalry. Hiranya Kasipu experienced an exchange
of the ghastly and devastating Feature of the Supreme Lord.

The five primary rasas, or flavors, constantly remain within the heart of
the pure devotee, and the other seven, which are secondary, sometimes appear
and disappear, and enrich the existing flavors and tastes. After enriching the
primary flavors, they disappear. The example of Santa Bhaktas or santa devotees
are the nine yogis named Kavi, Havi, Antariksha, Prabuddha, Pippalayana,
34 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Havirhotra, Dravid or Drumil, Chamass, and Karabhajan. The four Kumaras,
great sages, are: Sanaka, Sanandan, Sanatkumar and Sanatana. Examples of
devotees in the transcendental mode of servitorship are, in the Gokula, Raktak,
Chitrik, Patrak; these are all servants of Krishna. In Dwarka there are Daruka,
and in the Vaikuntha planets, there is Hanuman, and other persons. Devotees
in friendship are like Sridam in Vrindaban, and Bhima and Arjuna in Dwarka
or on the Battlefield of Kurukshetra. So far as those in paternal love with
Krishna are concerned, the devotees are his mother, father, uncle, and similar
relatives. In conjugal love, the devotees are first the damsels of Braja, Vrindaban, and the Queens and Goddesses of Fortune in Dwarka. No one can count
how many they are.

Attachment for Krishna is also of two kinds: One kind of attachment is
with awe and veneration. There is a lack of freedom in such attachments,
which are exhibited in Mathura and the Vaikuntha planets. In such Abodes of
the Lord, the flavor of transcendental loving service is restricted. But in the
Gokula, Vrindaban, the exchange of loving is freely done, and the cowherd
boys and the damsels of Vrindaban, although they know that Krishna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, do not show awe and veneration on account
of their thick and thin relationship in great intimacy with Him. Out of these
five principal transcendental tastes, awe and veneration are sometimes impediments to perceiving the Lord’s greatness, or in the matter of service to
the Lord. But in the matter of friendship and paternal affection, and in conjugal
love, such awe and veneration is reduced. For example, when Krishna appeared as the Son of Vasudeva and Devaki they prayed to the Lord with awe
and veneration, because they understood that the Supreme Lord Krishna or
Vishnu had appeared before them as their little child. This is confirmed in the
Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Fourty-fourth Chapter, sist verse: Devaki
and Vasudeva, after knowing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, began to.
pray to Him, although He was present as their Child. Similarly, when Arjuna
saw the Universal Form of the Lord, he was also afraid, and he begged pardon
because in his dealings with Krishna as an intimate friend, he had engaged in
much unceremonious behaviour with Him.

This is stated in the Bhagavad Gita, that Arjuna prayed, “My Dear Krishna,
I have sometimes insulted You, calling You my dear Friend Krishna, without
knowing the greatness of Your inconceivable power. Therefore, please forgive
me, because I was mad to address You like a common friend or a common
man.” Similarly, when Lord Krishna was playing jokes on Rukmini, she
thought Krishna might leave her, and therefore she was very much afraid,
Teachings to Rupa Goswami 35

and became perturbed. At that time Rukmini was fanning Krishna, and as soon.
as she was afraid that Krishna would leave, the fan fell down from her hand
and the hairs on her head became scattered. As a plantain tree falls by a blast of
windy air, so she became almost unconscious and fell down. But so far as
Yasoda, Krishna’s mother in Vrindaban is concerned, it is stated in the Srimad
Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Eighth Chapter, 36th verse, that the Personality of
Godhead, Who is worshipped by all the Vedas and Upanishads, and the
Samkhya system of philosophy, and all such authorized Scriptures—that:
Personality of Godhead was accepted as if born in her belly. In the same
Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Ninth Chapter, 12th verse, it is stated that:
mother Yasoda bound the Boy Krishna with a rope as if He was the Son born.
of her body, and appeared just like an ordinary child with a material body.
Similarly, the description of Krishna’s being treated as an ordinary man is:
given in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Eighteenth Chapter, 24th verse:
When He was defeated by His friends, the cowherd boys, Krishna carried.
Sridam on His shoulders.

Similarly, regarding the Gopis’ dealings with Sri Krishna at Vrindaban, it:
is described in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Thirtieth Chapter, verses.
36-38, as follows: When Sri Krishna took away Srimati Radhika alone from.
the group of the Rasa Dance, at that time Srimati Radhika thought that:
Krishna had left all the other Gopis. Although they are equally beautiful,
He satisfied Her in this way. With pride, She began to say, “My Dear Lord.
Krishna has left the beautiful Gopis, and He is satisfied with Me alone.” She
thought like that and felt pride. Addressing Krishna in the forest She said,
“My Dear Krishna, I am unable to move anymore. Now if You like You.
can take Me anywhere as You desire.” When Radhika requested Krishna in
such a way, Krishna replied, “You'd better come to My shoulder,” and as soon
as He said this, He disappeared from the scene, on which Srimati Radhika.
repented very much.

When Krishna disappeared from the scene of the Rasa Dancing, all the:
Gopis began to repent, saying, “My Dear Krishna! We have come here,
leaving aside our husbands, sons, relatives, brothers, and friends! Neglecting
their advice we have come to You, and You know better what is the reason
for our coming here. You know that we are captivated by the sweet sound of
Your flute, and therefore we have come. O, You are so cunning that at this
dead of night You have left girls and women like us! It is not very good for
You.”

The word sama means controlling the mind from being diverted in various
36 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

ways, and fixing it up in the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And one who
is so fixed up in the Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated on the sama
platform. On that platform the devotee understands that Krishna is the basic
principle of everything that be within our experience. The same thing is
explained in the Bhagavad Gita: after many, many births in the cultivation of
knowledge, one surrenders unto Vasudeva because he can understand that
Krishna is present in everything, that He is distributed all over the cosmic
manifestation. Everything is under the control of the Supreme Lord, and
everything, being situated in His energy, is different from Krishna in His
Personal Form. The same thing is explained in the Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu,
in which it is said that when intelligence is fixed on Krishna, that is called the
quality of sama. This is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead:
Samo mannisthata buddhee: that without being elevated to the platform of
santa rati, nobody can be fixed in knowing the greatness of Krishna, the diffusion
of His different energies which are the cause of all manifestation. The same
thing is further explained in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Eleventh Canto, Nineteenth Chapter, 33rd verse: equilibrium of the mind can be achieved by one
who has fixed his conclusion on the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the
Original Source of everything, and when one can control his senses, that is
called sama. When one is ready to tolerate all kinds of suffering for controlling
the senses and to keep the mind in equilibrium, that is called titiksha, or tolerance. And when one can control the urges of the tongue and the genital, that
is called dhriti. From dhriti one becomes dhira, the pacified. A pacified person
is never disturbed by the urges of the tongue and genital.

If one can fix up his mind in Krishna without any deviation, such a steadfast position in Krishna Consciousness is called santa rasa. In santa rasa two
things are visible—unflinching faith in Krishna, and cessation from all material
desires. The specific qualities of santa rasa, unflinching faith in Krishna and
withdrawal from all kinds of desires which are not in connection with Krishna,
are common factors in all the other rasas as well. Just like sound vibration is

 

generally present in all other elements, namely air, fire, water, and earth:
sound vibration is produced from the sky, so this sound is present in all other
elements. Similarly, the qualities of santa rasa, unflinching faith in Krishna and
desirelessness toward anything which is not Krishna—these two qualities are
present in other transcendental relationships, such as dasya, servitorship,
sakhya, fraternity, vatsalya, paternal affection, and the madhurya rasa, conjugal love.

When we speak of non-Krishna it does not mean that anything exists
Teachings to Rupa Goswami 37

without Krishna. There cannot be anything non-Krishna because everything
is a product of the energy of Krishna. And Krishna and His energies being
identical, indirectly, everything is Krishna. As an example: consciousness is
common to every living entity, but consciousness when it is purely centered
on Krishna, when it is called Krishna Consciousness, is pure. And consciousness when it is other than Krishna Consciousness, or consciousness directed
at sense gratification, is called non-Krishna. So in the polluted state the conception of non-Krishna comes. But in the pure state there is nothing but
Krishna Consciousness. The active interest in Krishna—that Krishna is mine
or Iam Krishna’s, and therefore my business is to satisfy the senses of Krishna—
is a higher status than the santa rasa. Simply to understand the greatness of
Krishna is to achieve that status of santa rasa, in which the worshipable object
is the impersonal Brahman or Paramatman. This activity of worship of the
impersonal Brahman and the Paramatman is the field of activities in empiric
philosophical speculation and mystic Yoga practice. But when one develops
still further in Krishna Consciousness or spiritual understanding, one appreciates that that Paramatman, the Supersoul, is the eternal worshipable
object, and he surrenders unto Him: Bohunam Janmanamante: after many,
many births. After many, many births in worship of the Brahman and Paramatman, when one surrenders unto Vasudeva Paramatman as the Supreme
Master, and accepts oneself as eternally the servant of Vasudeva, he becomes
a great transcendental realized soul. And at that time, on account of thick and
thin relationship with the Supreme Absolute Truth, one begins to render
some sort of transcendental loving service unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. And therefore the status of santa rasa, neutrality, transforms into
servitorship. It is then called dasya rasa.

In the dasya rasa status, the conception of the Supreme Lord is exhibited
in the greatest quantity of awe and veneration. The greatness of the Supreme
Lord is appreciated in dasya rasa also. It is marked here that in the status of
santa rasa there is no spiritual activity of service, but in the status of dasya rasa,
that service begins. Therefore, in the dasya rasa two qualities are there: this
means the quality of the santa rasa, and the consciousness of the transcendental
taste of fraternity.

The existence of the transcendental qualities of santa rasa and dasya rasa
is certainly there, but beyond that there is another quality, confidential attachment, which is pure transcendental love. This confidence in the Supreme
Personality is technically known as visrambha. In that status of visrambha,
fraternity, there is no sense of awe or veneration toward the Supreme Per38 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

sonality of Godhead. As such, in the transcendental relationship of sakhya
rasa there are three transcendental qualities: the sense of greatness, the sense
of kinship, and the sense of intimacy without any impression of awe or veneration. Therefore, in the relationship of fraternity, one transcendental quality
is further increased.

Similarly, in the status of paternal affection there are four qualities: above
the three qualities already mentioned there is another sense of the devotee,
that the Supreme Lord is dependent on the mercy of the devotee. As parent
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the devotee also sometimes chastises
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and considers Him as maintained by
such devotee. This transcendental sense of being the maintainer of the Supreme
Maintainer is very much pleasing both to the devotee and the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The Lord instructed Srila Rupa Goswami to write the transcendental
literature named Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu, the Science of Devotional Service,
indicating therein the substance of the five transcendental relationships. It is
explained there how the transcendental quality of santa rasa in the shape of
unflinching faith in Krishna, is further developed to the form of dasya rasa
with the spirit of service, and then to sakhya rasa for undeterred fraternity,
and can be still more developed in the transcendental flavor of paternal love,
with the sense of maintaining the Lord. All culminates in the highest platform
of conjugal love, wherein all the different transcendental relationships exist
simultaneously.
CHAPTER TWO

: \\\l

  

if i,

   

a

Sanatan Goswami

I offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, by whose
mercy even a person in the lowest status of life can find direction in transcendental
devotional service to the Lord.

After Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu accepted the renounced order of life,
Sannyasa, He travelled all over India. During this period, He went to Maldaha,
a district in Bengal, and in that portion of the land there was a village by the
name of Ramkeli. Two government ministers of the Nawab Hussain Shah’s
regime lived there, namely Dabir Khas and Shakar Mallik, later renamed
Sanatan Goswami and Rupa Goswami. They had a chance to meet Lord
Chaitanya, and after meeting Him they decided that they would retire from
the government service and join His Samkirtan movement. The two brothers
at once took steps to leave their material engagements, and appointed two
learned Brahmins to perform certain Vedic religious rituals in order to achieve
complete freedom for the devotional service of Krishna.

These preliminary activities are known as Purascharya. The ritual function

39
40 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

of this process is that three times a day one has to worship and offer respects
to one’s forefathers, offer oblation to the fire, and respectfully offer foodstuffs
to a learned Brahmin. Five items; the time, the worship, the offering of
respect, the offering of oblation into the fire, and the offering of foodstuffs
to a Brahmin; comprise Purascharya. In the Hari Bhakti Vilas, the directional
authoritative book, these rituals are mentioned.

After performance of these religious rituals, the younger brother Shakar
Mallik (Rupa Goswami), returned to his home with an immense amount
of money which he had acquired during his government service. The silver
and gold coins he brought back filled a large boat. After arriving home he
divided the accumulated wealth first into two, and distributed one part to
the Brahmins and Vaishnavas. Thus, for the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he distributed fifty per cent of his accumulated wealth
to persons engaged in the Supreme Lord’s transcendental loving service.
The Brahmins are meant to understand the Absolute Truth; and thereafter,
when one is actually engaged in the loving service of the Lord, he is called
a Vaishnava. Both the Brahmins and the Vaishnavas are supposed to be fully
engaged in transcendental service, and Rupa Goswami, considering their
important transcendental position, gave them fifty per cent of his wealth.
The balance was again divided into two: one part he distributed to his relatives
or dependent family members, and the other he kept against personal
emergency.

This distribution of personal wealth is very instructive for all who desire
to be elevated to the advancement of spiritual knowledge. Generally, a person
bequeaths all his accumulated wealth to the family members, and then retires
from family activities for progress in spiritual knowledge. But here we find
the exemplary behavior of Rupa Goswami: he gave fifty per cent of his
wealth for spiritual purposes. This should be the example for every one of us.
The twenty-five per cent of his accumulated wealth which he kept against
personal emergency he deposited with a good business firm, since in those
days there were no banks. Another ten thousand coins were deposited for
expenditures by his elder brother, Sanatan Goswami.

Rupa Goswami at this time received information that Lord Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu was preparing to proceed toward Vrindaban from Jagannath
Puri. He sent two messengers to receive actual information of the Lord’s
itinerary, and he made his own plans to go to Mathura to meet the Lord there.
It appears that Rupa Goswami got permission to join Lord Chaitanya, but
Sanatan Goswami did not. Therefore, Sanatan Goswami entrusted his responTe *

a

a]
7
J
=
a
-_
=
f.

tity. = ils a iT hax Ferra pp ih

Te
Qotentiingart apa toashi miu
bes a Mei ub a

| petit Hilal “4 ay
: ral | iy, a ET
“ir | Ln " oll

py Pop Hah yaar 4 pits

PEE emai SS ALL, ee

i (i 1 ‘Hu mri " 5 : i Ene eH 7 J i a r bf " a ‘ ike WI i” i " 0 z i
sh a t,o Flee Ae. re AT Te

‘pone

Ii.

|

iy

i

I

{re a

Ls

hey

ha Hs 5 om te |. “hi
, i i B., : =
r aD ad ie

j 1.

7 - - oa ie athe af . I 3
ee ee ee eee

 

Sanatan Goswami’s Resignation from the Government Service
of Nawab Hussin Shah of Bengal (15th century)
Sanatan Goswami AI

sibility in the government service to his immediate assistants, and he remained
at home to study Srimad Bhagwatam.

He engaged some ten or twenty learned Brahmins, and began an intensive
study of Srimad Bhagwatam in their company. While he was thus engaged,
he submitted sick reports to the Nawab, but the ruler was very anxious for
his advice in government matters, and therefore he suddenly appeared one
day at Sanatan Goswami’s house. The Nawab entered the assembly of Sanatan
Goswami and the Brahmins, and out of respect all of them stood up to receive
him and they offered him a place to sit. The Nawab said:

“You have submitted sick reports, but sent my physician to see you, and
he reported that you have no illness. I did not know why you were submitting
sick reports and not attending to your service, so I have personally come to
see you. And I’m much perturbed by your behavior. As you know, I completely depend on you and your responsible work in governing. I was therefore free to act in other matters because I was depending on you, but if you
do not join me, your past devotion will be spoiled. Now, what is your intention? Please tell me.”

On hearing this, Sanatan Goswami replied that he was unable to work
anymore and it would be very kind of the Nawab if he appointed somebody
else to execute the work that was entrusted to him. The Nawab became very
angry at this and said, “Your elder brother lives like a hunter, and if you also
retire from the administration then everything will be finished.” It is said
that the Nawab used to treat Sanatan Goswami as a younger brother. The
Nawab was engaged in conquering different parts of the country, and he
was also engaged in hunting, and therefore he depended more or less on
Sanatan Goswami for administration; and so he pleaded with him: “If you
also retire from the government service, how will the administration be run?”
Sanatan Goswami replied very gravely: “You are the governor of Gouda,
and you punish different kinds of criminals in different ways. So you are at
liberty to punish anyone according to his activity.” The purpose of his reply
was that the governor was engaged in hunting animals and killing men to
expand his kingdom; so let both of them suffer according to the acts they
were performing.

The Nawab was intelligent, and he understood Sanatan Goswami’s purpose and left the place in an angry mood. Shortly afterward, he went off to
conquer Orissa, and ordered the arrest of Sanatan Goswami until he returned.

Rupa Goswami then learned that his elder brother Sanatan had been
arrested by the Nawab. He sent information by messenger that the ten thou42 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

sand coins in Gouda (Bengal) in custody of the Grocer, could be used to release
him from the Nawab’s detention. Rupa Goswami, with his younger brother
whose name was Sri Ballabha, then started for Vrindaban to meet Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu. Sanatan offered five thousand coins to the keeper of the jail
in which he was being kept in custody. He advised the jailkeeper to gladly
accept the five thousand coins from him and let him go, because by accepting
such money he would be materially benefitted, and at the same time he
would be acting very righteously in freeing Sanatan for spiritual activities.

The custodian replied, “Of course I can let you go, because you have done
many services for me and you are in government service. I know that, but
Iam afraid of the Nawab when he hears that you are free. I'll have to explain.
How can I accept such a proposal?” Sanatan gave a story which the custodian
might submit to the Nawab—as to how he had escaped—and he then raised
his offer to ten thousand coins. The custodian then agreed to the proposition,
as he was very anxious to get the ten thousand coins. And so he let him go.

Sanatan then proceeded to Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. He did not go
on the open road but travelled instead through the jungles until he arrived
at a place in Bihar called Pabda, and rested there in the hotel. The hotel keeper,
meanwhile, was informed by an astrologer employed at the hotel that Sanatan
Goswami had some gold coins with him, and he wanted to take them from
him. And so he spoke with superficial respect: “You just take your rest
tonight, and in the morning I shall arrange for you to get out of this jungle
trap. Sanatan, however, was suspicious of the behavior of the hotel keeper,
and he inquired from his accompanying servant Isan whether he had some
money. Isan told him that he had seven gold coins with him. Sanatan did not
like the idea of the servant carrying such money. He was angry with him
and said, “Why do you carry this death knell on the road?”

Sanatan at once took the seven gold coins and offered them to the hotel
keeper; he then requested the hotel keeper to help him through the jungle.
He informed him that he was on a special journey for the government and
could not travel on the open road, and therefore it would be very kind if the
hotel keeper would help him to get over the jungle mountain. The hotel
keeper replied, “I understood that you had eight coins with you and I was.
thinking of killing you to take them. But you are very good, I can understand,
and so you don’t have to offer me the money. I'll get you out of the hill-tract.”

Sanatan replied, “If you don’t accept these coins then somebody else will
take them from me. Somebody will kill me for them, so better you take
them. I offer them to you.” The hotel keeper then gave him full assistance
and that very night he helped him to get past the hills.
Sanatan Goswami A3

When Sanatan emerged, he requested his servant to go home with the
one coin that he had still with him, and he would go on alone. After the
departure of his servant, Sanatan felt completely free. With torn clothing and
with a water-pot in his hand he began to proceed toward Lord Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu. On the way he met his rich brother-in-law who was also in the
service of the government, and who offered him an excellent blanket, which
Sanatan accepted at his special request. Then he parted from him and went
on alone to see Chaitanya Mahaprabhu at Benares.

When he reached Benares, he understood that the Lord was there and
he was very glad. He was informed by people that Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
was staying at the house of Chandra Sekhar Acharya, and he went there.
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was inside the house and He could understand that
Sanatan had arrived at the door. He asked Chandra Sekhar to call the man
who was sitting at His door, “He is a Vaishnava, a great devotee of the Lord.”
Chandra Sekhar went out to see the man but he saw no Vaishnava at the
door; he saw only a man who appeared to be a mendicant. The Lord then
asked to see the mendicant. When Sanatan entered the courtyard of the house,
Lord Chaitanya hurriedly came to receive him and embraced him. When the
Lord embraced him, Sanatan became overwhelmed with spiritual ecstasy,
and he began to say, “My dear Lord, please do not touch me.” But both of
them embraced each other and began to cry. Seeing Sanatan and Lord Chaitanya acting thus, Chandra Sekhar was struck with wonder. Lord Chaitanya
received Sanatan in this way, and asked him to sit down with Him on a bench.

He was touching the body of Sanatan with his hand and Sanatan asked
Him, “My dear Lord, please do not touch me.” The Lord replied, “I am
touching you just for My purification, because you are a great devotee. By
your devotional service you can deliver the whole universe for going back
to Godhead.”

In this connection the Lord quoted a nice verse from Srimad Bhagwatam.
The purport of the verse is that a person who is a devotee of Lord Krishna,
one hundred per cent engaged in devotional service, is far better than a
Brahmin who is learned in all the Vedic literature, but who is not engaged
in the devotional service of the Lord. The devotee can purify every place
and every thing because he is carrying the Supreme Lord within his heart.

In the Vedic literature it is also stated that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead does not recognize even a person who is very learned in all the
divisions of the Vedas; but, rather, He likes a person even if born of a low
family, provided that person is a devotee. Instead of offering charities to some
Brahmin who is not a devotee, if something is offered to a devotee, that
A4 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

offering is accepted by the Lord. In other words, anything offered to the Lord
may be given to His devotees. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu also quoted from
Srimad Bhagwatam that, if a Brahmin, although qualified with the twelve
different qualities of a Brahmin, is not a devotee of the Supreme Lord, then
he is lower than the lowest of the low—even though born in a high family.
A devotee, although born in a Chandala (dogeater) family, can purify his
whole family for I00 generations past and future by devotional service,
whereas a proud Brahmin cannot even purify himself. It is said in the Hari
Bhakti Sudodaya, “O devotee of the Lord, to see you is the perfection of the
eyes, to touch your body is the perfection of bodily activities, to glorify your
qualities is the perfection of the tongue—because it is very rare to find a pure
devotee like you.”

The Lord next said to Sanatan that Krishna is very merciful, and is the
Deliverer of the fallen soul. “He has saved you from Maharauraba.” This
Maharauraba, hell, is described in Srimad Bhagwatam. It is for persons who are
engaged in killing animals. It is stated there that butchers or animal-eaters
go to that hell. Sanatan replied, “I do not know the mercy of Krishna, but I
can understand that Your mercy is causeless upon me. You have delivered
me from the entanglement of material life.”

Then the Lord inquired: “How did you get free from your custody?
I understood that you were arrested.” Sanatan narrated the whole story of
how he was released. Lord Chaitanya then informed him, “I have seen your
two brothers, and I have advised them to proceed toward Vrindaban.”

Lord Chaitanya now introduced Chandra Sekhar to Sanatan, and there
was a pleasant invitation made for Sanatan to dine with him. The Lord requested Chandra Sekhar to take Sanatan to the barber and make him gentle,
because Sanatan had grown a long beard which Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
did not like. He therefore asked Chandra Sekhar to take Sanatan to a bath
and get him clean-shaved. He asked him to change his clothes also.

After taking a bath and cleansing himself, Sanatan requested Chandra
Sekhar to give him some good cloth. When Lord Chaitanya was informed
that Sanatan did not accept new garments, but accepted only some used
garments from Chandra Sekhar, He was very glad. The Lord sat down for
lunch and asked Chandra Sekhar to keep food for Sanatan. Chandra Sekhar
did not offer him food immediately, however, but after the Lord finished
His eating there were some remnants of His foodstuff, and that was offered
to Sanatan while the Lord went for His rest.

After this, Lord Chaitanya introduced one Maharastrian Brahmin, His
Sanatan Goswami A5

devotee, to Sanatan; and that Maharastrian Brahmin invited Sanatan to accept
lunch daily at his place, as long as he remained at Benares. Sanatan said, “So
long as I remain at Benares, I will beg from door to door; and the Lord will
be so good as to accept from you this invitation for daily lunch at the Brahmin’s house.”

By this behavior of Sanatan Lord Chaitanya was very much pleased; but
He noticed the valuable blanket that was given to Sanatan by his brotherin-law while on route to Benares. Although Lord Chaitanya was overlooking
the blanket, Sanatan understood that Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu did not
approve of such a valuable garment on his body, and he planned to get rid
of it. He immediately went to the bank of the Ganges and there saw a mendicant
washing an old quilt. Sanatan asked him to trade the old quilt for the valuable
blanket. The poor medicant thought that Sanatan was joking with him, so
he said, “How is that? You appeared to be a very nice gentleman, but you are
mocking me in this unmannerly way.”

Sanatan informed him, “I am not joking with you. I am very serious.
Will you kindly exchange that torn quilt for this blanket?” Then Sanatan
exchanged his blanket for the torn quilt, and he came before the Lord.

The Lord inquired, “Where is your valuable blanket?”

Sanatan informed Him about the exchange at the Ganges of the blanket
for the torn quilt. The Lord then loved him for this and He thanked Sanatan:
“You are intelligent enough and you have now finished all your attraction
for material wealth.” In other words, the Lord accepts a person for devotional
service only when he is completely free from all materialistic possessions.
The Lord said to Sanatan, “It would not look well to become a mendicant
and go begging from door to door while at the same time you have such a
valuable blanket on your body; it is contradictory, and people would look
at it with abhorrence.” Sanatan replied to the Lord, “Whatever I am doing
to become free from material attachment, it is all Your mercy.” The Lord
was very much pleased with him, and both of Them discussed spiritual
advancement.

Previous to this meeting of Sanatan and Lord Chaitanya, Lord Chaitanya
met the householder-devotee, Ramananda Roy. In that meeting, which is
discussed in a different chapter, Lord Chaitanya asked Ramananda Roy
questions and Ramananda replied as if he were the teacher of the Lord.
But in this case Sanatan will put questions to the Lord and the Lord will answer
them.

The instruction and teachings of Lord Chaitanya are very important for
46 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

people in general. He teaches the process of devotional service, which is the
constitutional position of every living entity; it is every man’s duty to advance
in spiritual science. All these things are very nicely discussed in the talks between Lord Chaitanya and Sanatan Goswami. At the mercy of Lord Chaitanya
Sanatan was able to put questions before Him, and these are replied to properly.

The meeting of Sanatan and Lord Chaitanya teaches us that in order to
understand spiritual subject matters, one must approach a Spiritual Master
like Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and make submissive enquiries. This is also
confirmed in the instruction of the Bhagavad Gita: that one should approach
a man of authority, and learn from him about spiritual science.
CHAPTER THREE

 

Teachings to Sanatan Goswami

In the instructions of Lord Chaitanya to Sanatan Goswami we can understand the science of God in the matter of His transcendental Form, His opulences, and His devotional service—for everything is being described to Sanatan
Goswami by the Lord Himself. At that time Sanatan fell at the feet of the
Lord and with great humility asked about his own real identity. He spoke
as follows:

“I am born of a lower family, my associations are all abominable, and
I am fallen, the most wretched of Mankind. I was suffering in the dark well
of material enjoyment, and I never knew the actual goal of my life. I do not
know what is beneficial to me. Although in the mundane sphere I am what
is known as a great learned man, I am in fact so much of a fool that I even
accept that I am learned. You have accepted me as Your servant, and You
have delivered me from the entanglement of material life. Now You can tell
me what my duty is in this liberated state of life.”

In other words, as we see by this plea, liberation is not the final word in

A7
48 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

perfection. There must be activities in liberation. Sanatan clearly asks: “You
have saved me from the entanglement of material existence. Now, after
liberation, what is my duty? Kindly explain it to me.” Sanatan further inquired,
“Who am I? Why are the three-fold miseries always giving me trouble?
And, finally, tell me how I will be relieved from this material entanglement?
I do not know how to question You about the advancement of spiritual life,
but I beg that You kindly, mercifully, let me know everything that I should
know.”

This is the process of acceptance of a spiritual master by the disciple:
One should approach a spiritual master and humbly submit to him, and then
inquire from him about one’s spiritual progress.

The Lord was pleased by Sanatan’s submissive behavior, and He replied
as follows: “You have already received benediction from Lord Krishna, and
therefore you know everything, and you are free from all the miseries of
material existence.” The Lord further replied that, because Sanatan was in
Krishna Consciousness, naturally, by the grace of Krishna, he was already
conversant with everything, but “Because you are a humble devotee, you
are asking me to confirm what is already realized by you. This is very nice.”
These are the characteristics of a true devotee. In the Narada Bhakti Sutra it is
said that one who is very serious about developing his Krishna Consciousness,
by the grace of the Lord, has his desire for understanding Krishna fulfilled
very soon. The Lord said, “You are a suitable person for protecting the devotional service of the Lord. Therefore it is My duty to instruct you in the
science of God, and I will explain to you everything step by step.”

It is the duty of a disciple approaching a spiritual master to enquire about
his constitutional position. In conformity to that spiritual process, Sanatan
has already asked, “What am I, and why am I suffering from the three-fold
miseries?” The three-fold miseries are called adhyatmic, adhibhautic, and adhidaivic. Adhyatmic means caused by the body and mind: sometimes the living
entity suffers bodily, and sometimes he is distressed mentally—both are
adhyatmic miseries. We experience these miseries even in the womb of our
mother. There are many forms of misery that take advantage of our delicate
body and give us pain.

Miseries inflicted by other living entities are called adhibhautic. There are
many living entities, such as bugs born of eggs, that cause us miseries while
we are sleeping in bed. There are many living entities, like cockroaches, that
sometimes give us pain, and there are other living entities born on different
kinds of planets, and they also cause us miseries.
Teachings to Sanatan Goswami AQ

So far as adhidaivic miseries are concerned, they originate with the demigods
from the higher planets. For instance, sometimes we suffer from serious cold
weather, sometimes we suffer from the thunderbolt, sometimes from earthquakes, tornadoes, droughts and other natural disasters. So we are always
suffering one or another of these three kinds of miseries.

Sanatan’s enquiry was: “What is the position of the living entities? Why
are they always undergoing these three kinds of miseries?” Sanatan has
admitted his weakness: although he was known by the mass of people as
a greatly learned man (and actually he was a highly learned Sanskrit scholar) —
and although he accepted the designation of a very learned man given him
by the mass of people, yet he did not actually know what his constitutional
position was, and why he was subjected to the threefold miseries.

The necessity of approaching a spiritual master is not a fashion, but is
for he who is seriously conscious of the material miseries, and who wants to be
free of them. It is the duty of such a person to approach the spiritual master.
We find similar circumstances in the Bhagavad Gita: When Arjuna was
perplexed by so many problems involving whether to fight or not, he accepted Lord Krishna as his Spiritual Master. There also it was a case of the
Supreme Spiritual Master instructing Arjuna about the constitutional position
of the living entity.

In the Bhagavad Gita we are informed that the constitutional nature of the
individual entity is spirit soul: he is not matter. Therefore, as spirit soul, he is
part and parcel of the Supreme Soul, the Absolute Truth, the Personality of
Godhead. We also learn that it is the duty of the spirit soul to surrender; for
only then can he be happy. The last instruction of the Bhagavad Gita is that
the spirit soul is to surrender completely unto the Supreme Soul, Krishna,
and in that way realize happiness.

Here, also, Lord Chaitanya, in answering the questions of Sanatan, repeats
the same truth; but without giving him information about the spirit soul
which is already described in the Gita. He begins from the point where
Krishna ended His instruction. It is accepted by great devotees that Lord
Chaitanya is Krishna Himself. And from the point where He ended His instruction in the Gita, He now begins His instruction again, to Sanatan. The Lord
said to Sanatan:

“Your constitutional position is that you are pure living soul. This material
body is not the identity of your real self, neither is your mind your real identity,
nor your intelligence, nor is false ego the real identity of the self. Your identity
is that you are the eternal servitor of the Supreme Lord, Krishna. Your posi50 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

tion is that you are transcendental. The superior energy of Krishna is spiritual
in constitution, and the inferior external energy is material. You are between
the material energy and the spiritual energy, and therefore your position is
marginal. In other words, you belong to the marginal potency of Krishna.
You are simultaneously one with, and different from, Krishna. Because you
are spirit, therefore you are not different from Krishna. But because you are
only a minute particle of Krishna, you are therefore different from Him.”

This simultaneous oneness and difference always exists in the relationship
between the living entities and the Supreme Lord. From the marginal position
of the living entities, this “simultaneously one and different” concept is
understood. The living entity is just like a molecular part of the sunshine,
whereas Krishna is compared to the blazing, shining sun. Lord Chaitanya
compared the living entities to the blazing sparks from the fire, and the
Supreme Lord to the blazing fire of the sun. The Lord cites in this connection
a verse from Vishnu Purana, in which it is stated that everything that is manifested within this cosmic world is but an energy of the Supreme Lord. For
example, as the fire emanating from one place exhibits its illumination and
heat all around, so the Lord, although situated in one place in the spiritual
world, manifests His different energies everywhere. And the whole world
of cosmic representation is but different manifestations of His energy.

The energy of the Supreme Lord is transcendental and spiritual, and the
living entities are part and parcel of that energy. But there is another energy
called material energy, which is covered by the cloud of ignorance, and thereby
divided into the three modes, or gunas, of material Nature. Lord Chaitanya
quoted from Vishnu Purana that all inconceivable energies reside in the
Supreme Personality of the Lord, and the whole cosmic manifestation acts
due to the same inconceivable energy of the Supreme Lord.

The Lord says that the living entities are also known as Kshetrajna, or
“Knower of the field of activities.” In the Thirteenth Chapter of the Gita,
the body is described as the field of activities, and the living entity as Kshetrajna,
the knower of that field. Although the living entity is constitutionally conversant with spiritual energy, or has the potency to understand, he is covered
by the material energy, and he consequently believes this body to be himself.
This is called false ego. In material existence, deluded by this false ego, the
bewildered living entity changes his different bodies and suffers various kinds
of miseries. The knowledge of his true position is present to different extents
in different varieties of living entities.

In other words, it is to be understood that the living entity is part and
Teachings to Sanatan Goswami SI

parcel of the spiritual energy of the Supreme Lord. The material energy 1s
inferior energy, and therefore man has the potency to become uncovered
from this material energy and utilize the spiritual energy. It is stated in the
Bhagavad Gita that the superior energy is covered by the inferior energy.
Due to this covering, the living entity is subjected to the miseries of the material world, and, in proportion to the different degrees of obscureness, he
suffers material miseries. Those who are a little enlightened suffer less, but,
on the whole, everyone is subjected to material miseries, due to being covered
by the material energy.

The Lord also quoted from the Gita, Seventh Chapter, in which it is stated
that earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence, and ego all combine
together to form the inferior energy of the Supreme Lord. But the Superior
Energy is the real identity of the living being. Because of that energy the
whole material world functions. The cosmic manifestation, made of material
elements, has no power to act unless it is moved by the superior energy, the
living entity. So, actually, the conditional life of the living entity is forgetfulness of his relationship with the Supreme Lord in the superior energy. When
that relationship is forgotten, conditional life is the result. Only when man
revives his real identity, that of eternal servitor to the Lord, does he become

liberated.
CHAPTER FOUR

 

The Wise Man

Nobody can trace the history of the living entity’s entanglement in material energy. Therefore the Lord says that it is beginningless. Beginningless
means that conditional life exists prior to the Creation—it is simply manifested
with, and after, the creation. Due to forgetfulness of his nature, the living
entity, although spirit, suffers all kinds of miseries in material existence. It is
to be understood here that there are also other living entities who are not
entangled in this material energy. Such living entities are situated in the
Spiritual World, and they are called liberated souls. They are always engaged
in Krishna Consciousness, in devotional service.

The activities of those who are conditioned by material Nature are taken
into account, and in their next life, according to these activities, they are offered
different grades of material bodies. In the material world the spiritual soul
in conditional life is subjected to different rewards and punishments. When
he is rewarded, he is elevated to the higher planets, due to his righteous activities. And there he becomes one of the many demigods. And when he is

52
The Wise Man 53

punished for his abominable activities, he is thrown into different kinds of
hellish planets, and there he suffers the miseries of material existence more
acutely. The Lord gives a very nice example of this punishment: Formerly
a king used to punish a criminal by dunking him in the river, and then raising
him again for a breath, and then again dunking him once more in the water.
Material Nature punishes and rewards the individual entity in just the same
way. When he is punished he is dunked into the water of material miseries,
and when he is rewarded he is taken out of it for some time. Elevation of the
living entity to higher planets or to a higher status of life is never permanent.
He has to come down again to be submerged in the water. All this goes on
in this material existence. Sometimes one is elevated to the higher planetary
system, and sometimes one is thrown into the hellish condition of material
life.

In this connection the Lord recites a nice verse from Srimad Bhagwatam,
taken from the instruction of Narada Muni to Vasudeva, the father of Krishna.
In this quotation from the nine sages who were instructing Maharaj Nemi,
it is stated that forgetfulness of the relationship with Krishna is called Maya.
Actually, Maya means “that which is not.” It has no existence. Therefore,
that the living entity has no connection with the Supreme Lord is a false conception. He may not believe in the existence of God, or he may think he has
no relationship with God, but these are all “illusions,” or Maya. Due to his
absorption in this false conception of life, man is always fearful and full of
anxieties. In other words, a Godless concept of life is Maya; and, therefore,
one who is actually learned in the Vedic literature surrenders unto the Supreme
Lord with great devotion, and accepts Him as the Supreme Goal. When a
living entity becomes forgetful of the constitutional nature of his relationship
with God, then he is at once overwhelmed by the external energy, and this
is the cause of his false ego, identifying his body as himself. His whole conception of the material Universe is due to this false conception of the body.
He becomes attached to this body, and to the by-products of this body. To
escape this entanglement he has simply to perform his duty—to surrender
unto the Supreme Lord with intelligence, with devotion, and with sincere
Krishna Consciousness.

A conditioned soul falsely thinks himself happy in the material world,
but if he is favored by an unalloyed devotee—by hearing instruction from the
unalloyed devotee—he gives up the desire for material enjoyment and becomes
enlightened in Krishna Consciousness. As soon as one enters into Krishna
Consciousness, his desire for material enjoyment at once is vanquished, and
54 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

gradually he becomes free from material entanglement. For example, because
there is no question of darkness where there is light, Krishna Consciousness
is like the light that dispels the darkness of material sense enjoyment.

A Krishna conscious person is never under the false conception that he is
One with God. He does not think that he would be happy by working for
himself. He engages all his energy in the service of the Supreme Lord, and
thereby becomes released from the clutches of illusory material energy. In
this connection the Lord quotes a verse from the Bhagavad Gita, Seventh
Chapter, to the effect that the material energy containing the three modes
of material Nature is very strong. It is very difficult to escape the process of
material energy, but one who surrenders unto Krishna easily becomes free
from the clutches of Maya.

The Lord went on to teach that the conditioned soul, for each and every
moment in which he is engaged in some fruitive activity, is forgetting his
real identity. Sometimes when he is fatigued, when he is tired of material
activities, he wants liberation and wants to become one with the Supreme,
but at other times he thinks that by working hard for his sense gratification
he will be happy. In both cases he is covered by material energy. For the
enlightenment of such bewildered conditioned souls, who are working under
false identification, the Lord has presented us with so much Vedic literature,
such as the Vedas, the Puranas, and the Vedanta Sutra—all intended to guide
the human being back to Godhead. The Lord has presented further instructions, advising that when a conditioned soul is accepted by the mercy of the
spiritual master, and when he is guided by the Supersoul, he takes advantage
of the various Vedic Scriptures, becomes enlightened, and makes progress
in his spiritual realization. It is understood that Lord Krishna is always merciful to His devotees, and therefore He has presented all this Vedic literature,
by which one can understand his relationship with Krishna, and can act in
that relationship—with the result that he is gifted with the ultimate goal of
life.

Actually every living entity is destined to reach the Supreme Lord, and
everyone can understand his relationship with the Supreme Lord. The execution of duties to attain perfection is known as devotional service, and in maturity such devotional service becomes Love of God, the factual goal of life
for every living being. The living entity is not intended to achieve success
in religious perfection or economic development or sense enjoyment. Religiousness, economic development, sense enjoyment, and liberation should
not actually be desired by the living entity. The real desire of the entity should
be to achieve the stage of loving transcendental service to the Lord.
The Wise Man 55

The All-attractive features of Lord Krishna help one in attaining Krishna
Consciousness, and when one is engaged in Krishna Consciousness he can
realize the relationship between Krishna and himself.

In this connection the Lord quotes one story from the commentary of
Madhva which occurs in Srimad Bhagwatam, Fifth Canto. The story involves the instruction of Sarvajna to a poor man who came to him to have
his future told. When Sarvajna saw the horoscope of the poor man, he was
at once astonished that the man was so poor, and he said to him, “Oh, why
are you so unhappy? I see from your horoscope that you have some hidden
treasure left to you by your father. The horoscope, however, states that your
father could not disclose this to you because he died in a foreign place. But
now you can search out the hidden treasure left by your father and be happy.”
This story is cited because the living entity is suffering due to his ignorance
of the hidden treasure of his Father. The hidden treasure of the Father, Krishna,
is Love of Godhead. In every Vedic Scripture the conditioned soul is advised
to find that hidden treasure, which is known as Love of God. As is stated in the
Bhagavad Gita, a conditioned soul, although he is the son of the Wealthiest—
the Personality of Godhead—does not realize it; therefore the Vedic literature
is given to him to help him search out his Father and his paternal property.

Sarvajna further advised the poor man: “Don’t try to dig on the southern
side of your house to find the hidden treasure. If you do so, you'll be attacked
by a poisonous wasp and you will be baffled in finding the treasure. The search
should be to the eastern side where there is actual light—which is called devotional service, or Krishna Consciousness. On the southern side there is ritualistic
performance of the Vedic Scripture, and on the western side there is speculative empiric knowledge, and on the northern side there is the Yoga system,
or the meditational process for self realization.”

If somebody searches for his ultimate goal by the ritualistic process, he
will be baffled. Such a process involves the performance of rituals under the
guidance of the priest who takes money in exchange for service. A man thinks
he will be happy by such performances, but actually they will not make him
happy. Even if he does gain some result therefrom, it is only temporary, and
his material distresses will continue. So he will never become truly happy
by such a ritualistic process. Instead, his material pangs increase more and
more.

Similarly, digging for the hidden treasure on the northern side is compared
with one’s self-realization by dint of the meditational process. By the meditational process perfection is to think oneself One with the Supreme Lord.
This merging into the Supreme by the living entity is something like the great
56 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

serpent swallowing up the smaller serpent. From practical experience we see
sometimes that a big serpent swallows up a smaller one, and the merging
into the spiritual existence of the Supreme is analogous. The small serpent is,
therefore, searching after perfection, and he is swallowed by the big serpent.

Digging on the western side is compared to the hidden treasure protected
by Yakasa, the evil spirit that protects it. The idea is that hidden treasure can
never be delivered by one who asks the favor of the Yakasa for attaining it.
The result is that he will simply be killed. The Yogins who practice meditation
are analogous to the small serpents. The speculative process of self-realization,
or Jnana, is also suicidal in this case.

Actually, one has to dig for the hidden treasure from the eastern side,
which is called devotional service in full Krishna Consciousness. That is the
perpetual hidden treasure, and when one attains to that achievement, he
becomes perpetually rich. One who is poor in devotional service and Krishna
Consciousness is always in need of material gain. Sometimes he suffers the bites
of poisonous things, and sometimes he is bafHed; sometimes he follows the
philosophy of monism and therefore loses his identity, and sometimes he is
swallowed by the big serpent. By giving up all these things and becoming
fixed in Krishna Consciousness, or devotional service to the Lord, he achieves
the perfection of life.
CHAPTER FIVE

  
   
 

Wil,

A=
—_— fio”
= N=
=\h 7 =

sah =

5,
me,

How to Approach God

Actually, all Vedic literature directs the human being toward the perfect
stage of devotion. The paths of fruitive activities, speculative knowledge and
meditation do not lead one to the perfectional stage, but the Lord actually
becomes approachable by the process of devotional service. Therefore, one
is recommended throughout the Vedic literature to accept the process of
devotional service. Lord Chaitanya quoted in this connection a verse from the
Srimad Bhagwatam, Eleventh Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, in which the Lord
says, My dear Uddhava, neither philosophical speculation nor Yoga achievements nor penances can give Me such pleasure as can devotional service practiced by the living entities.” He can only be achieved by devotional service,
as He is dear only to the devotees. If a person born in the lowest family of
humanity is a devotee, then he becomes freed from all contamination. Devotional service is the only path by which to achieve the Supreme Personality
of God.

This is the only perfection accepted in all Vedic literature. As a poor man

57
58 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

upon receiving some treasure becomes at once happy, so, when one attains
to devotional service, automatically the pains of material existence are vanquished. As one advances in devotional service, one attains love of Godhead,
and as he advances in the love for the Supreme he becomes free from all
material bondage. The disappearance of poverty and liberation from bondage
are not, however, the end results of love of Krishna. Actually, the love of
Krishna, love of God, exists in relishing the reciprocation of loving service.
In all Vedic literature one will find that attainment of this loving relationship
between the Supreme Lord and the living entities is the function of devotional
service. Our actual function is devotional service, and our ultimate goal of
achievement is love of Godhead. Therefore, in all Vedic literature Krishna
is the ultimate center. By knowledge of Krishna all problems of life are solved.

The Lord said that, according to Padma Purana, there are different Puranas
for worshipping different types of demigods; but such indications for worship
only bewilder persons into thinking that the demigods are supreme. And yet,
if the Puranas are scrutinized and studied it will be found that Krishna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the only Object of worship. For example,
in the Markandio Purana there is mention of Devi worship, worship of the
goddess Durga or Kali. But in that same Chandika it is also stated that all these
demigods—even in the shape of Durga or Kali—are different energies of
Vishnu. Therefore, even the study of the Puranas will reveal Vishnu, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, to be the only Object of worship.

The conclusion is that, directly or indirectly, all types of worship are
more or less indicating a worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krishna. In the Bhagavad Gita it is confirmed that anyone who worships the
demigods is in fact only worshipping Krishna, because the demigods are
different parts of the Body of Vishnu, or Krishna. That such worship of demigods is really irregular is also clearly stated in the Bhagavad Gita.

Srimad Bhagwatam confirms this by the question: What is the object of
worshipping the different types of demigods? In Vedic literature there are
various divisions of ritualistic activities. One is called Karmakanda, or purely
ritualistic activities; another is called Upasana-kanda, or speculating on the
Supreme Absolute Truth. What then is the purpose of the ritualistic sections
of Vedic literature, and what is the purpose of different mantras or hymns
indicating the worship of different types of demigods? And what is the purpose
of philosophical speculation on the subject of the Absolute Truth? The Srimad
Bhagwatam replies that all these different methods defined in Vedic literature
indicate the worship of the Supreme Lord, Vishnu. They are all indirect ways
How to Approach God 59

of worshipping the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sacrifices contained
in the ritualistic portion of the literature are to satisfy the Supreme Lord
Vishnu, because Yajna, sacrifice, is specifically meant to satisfy Vishnu. Vishnu’s
Name is also Yajneshwara, or Lord of the Sacrifices.

The neophytes are not all on the transcendental level, and therefore,
according to their situations in the different modes of material Nature, they
are advised to worship different types of demigods so that, gradually, they
may rise to the transcendental plane and be engaged in the devotional service
of Vishnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For example, it may be said
that some of the neophytes are attached to flesh-eating; and for them the
Puranas prescribe that they can eat flesh after offering it to the deity Kalli.

The philosophical sections of the Vedic hymns are meant to enable one to
distinguish the Supreme Personality of Godhead from Maya. After indicating
the position of Maya, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is approached in
pure devotional service. That is the purpose of philosophical speculation.
This is confirmed in the Bhagavad Gita in the Seventh Chapter: Bahunam
janmanam ante: “The philosophical speculators and empiric philosophers,
after speculating for many, many births, ultimately come unto the Supreme
Lord Krishna, and accept that Vasudeva (Krishna) is everything.” Therefore,
all Vedic rituals and different types of worship or philosophical speculation
ultimately aim at Krishna.

The Lord then told Sanatan Goswami about Krishna’s multiforms and
His unlimited opulence. He also described the nature of the spiritual manifestation, the material manifestation, and the manifestation of the living
entity. He also informed Sanatan Goswami that the planets in the Spiritual
Sky, known as Vaikunthas, and the Universes of the material manifestation,
are to be known as different types of manifestations; for they are creative manifestations of the two different types of energies—namely, the material energy
and the spiritual energy. Therefore, as far as Krishna Himself is concerned,
He is directly situated in His spiritual energy, or specifically in His internal
potency.

To help us understand the difference between the manifestation of the
spiritual energy and the material energy, there is clear analysis of the two
in the Second Canto of Srimad Bhagwatam. Also, Sukadeva Goswami, by
commenting on Verse One of the Tenth Canto, makes a similar clear, analytical study. Lord Chaitanya accepts Sukadeva Goswami .as an authorized
commentator on the Srimad Bhagwatam. Therefore He quotes his writing in
this connection; and He explains that in the Tenth Canto of the Bhagwatam
60 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

the life and activities of Krishna are described because Krishna is the Shelter
of all other manifestations. Therefore Sukadeva Goswami worshipped and
offered his obeisances unto Krishna, the Shelter of everything.

This purport maintains that in this world there are two different principles:
the one principle is the origin, or the shelter of everything, and the other
principle is the deduction from the original principle. The Supreme Truth
is the shelter of all manifestations. That Supreme Truth is called Asraya. All
other principles, which remain under the control of the Asraya-tattwa, or the
Absolute Truth, are called Asrita, or subordinate corollaries and reactions.
The purpose of the material manifestation is to give the conditioned soul
a chance to become liberated and return to the Asraya-tattwa, or the Absolute
Truth.

So everything that is in the cosmic Creation is dependent on the Asrayatattwa, the Supreme Absolute Truth. As such, the creative manifestation, or
Vishnu manifestation, the different types of demigods and manifestations of
energy, the living entities, the material elements—everything is dependent
on Krishna, the Supreme Truth. Srimad Bhagwatam indicates that everything,
directly and indirectly, has Krishna as the Supreme Shelter. Therefore the
analytical study of Krishna is the perfect knowledge, as is confirmed in the
Bhagavad Gita.

Lord Chaitanya described the different features of Lord Krishna in the
following manner, and asked Sanatan Goswami to hear attentively: He said
that Krishna originally is the Son of Nanda Maharaj, and He is the Absolute
Supreme Truth. He is the Cause of all causes, and He is the Origin of all
emanations and all incarnations, yet there in Vraja or Goloka Vrindaban He is
just like a young boy. His Form is eternal, full of bliss and full of knowledge
absolute. He is the Shelter of everything, and He is the Proprietor or Master
of everything.

In this connection Lord Chaitanya gives evidence from Brahma Samhita,
Fifth Chapter, 1st verse, which states that Krishna is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and His Body is full of knowledge, eternal and blissful. He is the
Original Person, known as Govinda, and He is the Cause of all causes. Therefore, Krishna is the Original Personality of Godhead; He is full of all six
opulences, and His Abode is known as Goloka Vrindaban, the highest planetary
system in the Spiritual Sky.

Lord Chaitanya also quotes a verse from the Srimad Bhagwatam, First
Canto, Third Chapter, in which it is stated clearly that all the incarnations
described in that particular verse are either direct expansions of Krishna, or
How to Approach God 61

are, indirectly, expansions of the expansions of Krishna. But the Krishna Name
mentioned there is the Original Personality of Godhead, and He appears on
this Earth, in this Universe or in any other Universe, when there is a disturbance created by the demons, who are always trying to disrupt the administration of the demigods.

To understand Krishna there are three different processes: the process of
empiric philosophical speculation, the process of meditation in the mystic
Yoga system, and the process of Krishna Consciousness, or devotional service.
Accordingly, in these different processes: 1) by empiric philosophical speculation, the impersonal Brahman feature of Krishna is understood; 2) by the
process of meditation or Yoga mysticism, the feature of the Supersoul, the
All-pervading expansion of Krishna, is understood; and 3) by devotional
service in full Krishna Consciousness, the Original Personality of Godhead,
Krishna is realized.

In this connection Lord Chaitanya quotes first from the Srimad Bhagwatam,
First Canto, Second Chapter, which states that those who are knowers of the
Absolute Truth describe the Absolute Truth in three features: some describe
the Absolute as impersonal Brahman, and some describe the Absolute Truth
as the localized All-pervading Supersoul, and some know that the Absolute
Truth is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna. In other words,
Brahman, the impersonal manifestation, and Paramatma, the localized manifestation, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are One and the same;
but, according to the different processes adopted, He is realized in different
features—Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan.

Impersonal Brahman realization is simple realization of the effulgence
emanating from the transcendental Body of Krishna. We compare this effulgence of the transcendental Body of Krishna to the sunshine: just as the sun
disc is there, the sun planet is there, and the Sungod is there, and the sunshine
is the shining effulgence of that original Sungod. Similarly, Brahmajyoti, the
spiritual effulgence, impersonal Brahman, is nothing but the Personal effulgence of Krishna.

To support this analysis Lord Chaitanya quotes one important verse from
Brahma Samhita, where Lord Brahma says: “I worship the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Govinda, by Whose Personal effulgence there is the unlimited
manifestation of the Brahmajyoti, and in that Brahmajyoti (the impersonal
manifestation of Krishna’s Bodily effulgence) there are innumerable Universes,
each full of innumerable planets.”

Lord Chaitanya further says that the Paramatma, the All-pervading feature
62 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

situated in everyone's body, is but a partial manifestation or expansion of
Krishna. But because Krishna is the Soul of the soul, there He is called Paramatma, Supreme Self. Lord Chaitanya now quoted a verse from Srimad
Bhagwatam concerning the talks of Maharaj Parikshit and Sukadeva Goswami.
In that verse it is understood that Maharaj Parikshit, while hearing about the
transcendental Pastimes of Krishna in Vrindaban, inquired from his Spiritual
Master, Sukadeva Goswami, as to why the inhabitants of Vrindaban were so
much attached to Krishna. To this question Sukadeva Goswami answered
that Krishna should be known as the Soul of all souls. He is the Soul of all
individual souls, and He is also the soul of the localized Paramatma. He was
acting just like a human being to attract persons to Him and to show that
He is not formless.

He is as good as other living beings, but He is the Supreme and other
living beings are all subordinate to Him. All living beings therefore can enjoy
spiritual bliss, eternal life and full knowledge in His association. Lord Chaitanya
also quotes a verse from Bhagavad Gita, in which the Supreme Lord speaks
to Arjuna about His different kinds of opulences, saying that He Himself
enters into this Universe by one of His plenary portions, Garbodakshayee
Vishnu, and He also enters into each Universe as the Kshirodakshayee Vishnu,
and then expands Himself as Supersoul in everyone's heart. Therefore, He
says, if anyone wants to understand the Supreme Absolute Truth in perfection, he must take to the process of devotional service in full Krishna Consciousness. Then it will be possible for him to understand the last word of the
Absolute Truth.
CHAPTER SIX

 

His Forms are One and the Same

By devotional service one can understand that Krishna first of all manifests
Himself as Svayamrupa, His Personal Form, then as Tadekatmarupa, and then
as Aveshar'pz. In these three features He manifests Himself in His transcendental Form. The feature of Svayamrupa is the Form in which Krishna can be
understood by one who may not understand His other features. In other words,
the Form in which Krishna is directly understood is called Svayamrupa, or His
Personal Form. The Tadekatmarupa is that Form which most resembles the
Svayamrupa, but has some differences of bodily features. This Tadekatmarupa
is divided into two manifestations, called the Personal expansion and the
Pastime expansion. As far as Avesharupa is concerned, sometimes Krishna
empowers some suitable living entity to represent Him. When a living’ entity
acts as a representative of the Supreme Lord, he is called Avesharupa, or
Shaktavesha Avatara.

His Personal Form is again divided into two: Svayamrupa and Svayaprakash.
As far as His Svayamrupa (or Pastime Form) is concerned, it is in that Form

63
64 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

that He remains always in Vrindaban with all the inhabitants of Vrindaban.
That Personal Form is again divided into two, known categorically as the
Prabhava and Baibhava Forms. For example, Krishna expanded Himself in
multiple Forms in the Rasa Dance. When He danced with the Gopis, He
expanded Himself in multiple Forms to dance with each and every Gopi who
took part in that dance. Similarly, He expanded Himself into 16,108 Forms
at Dwarka when He married 16,108 wives.

There are some instances of great mystics also expanding their bodily
features in a different way, but that sort of expansion by the Yoga process
is not applicable to Krishna. In the Vedic history, for example, Saubhary
Rishi, a sage, expanded himself into eight forms by the Yoga process, but that
expansion was simply a manifestation, for Saubhary remained one. But as
far as Krishna is concerned, when He manifested Himself in different Forms,
each and every one of them was a separate individual. When Narada Muni
visited Krishna at different palaces at Dwarka, he was astonished at this, and
yet Narada is never astonished to see the expansion of the body of a Yogi
since he knows the trick himself. Yet, in a verse in the Srimad Bhagwatam,
it states that Narada was astonished to see the expansions of Krishna. He
wonders how the Lord was present in each and every house of the 16,108
palaces with His queens.

Krishna Himself was in a different Form with each queen, and He was
acting in different ways. For example, in one Form He was talking with His
wife, in another Form He was engaged with His children, and in yet another
Form He was performing some household work. These different activities
are called actions in the Lord’s different emotions, and when He is in these
“emotional” Forms, the expansions are known as Vaibhavaprakash. Similarly,
there are other unlimited expansions of the Forms of Krishna, but even when
they are divided or expanded without limit, they are still one and the same.
There is no difference between one Form and another; that is the Absolute
nature of the Personality of Godhead.

In the Srimad Bhagwatam it is stated, in the Tenth Canto, Fortieth Chapter,
that at the time when Akrura was carrying both Krishna and Valaram from
Gokula to Mathura, he entered into the water of the Yamuna River and could
see in the waters all the spiritual planets in the Spiritual Sky. He saw there the
Lord in His Vishnu Form, along with Narada and the four Kumaras, and he
saw how they were worshipping. This is described in the Srimad Bhagwatam
as “Form.” It is stated in the Bhagavat Purana that there are many worshippers
who are purified by different processes of worship, such as the Vaishnava,
His Forms are One and the Same 65

or the Aryans, who also worship the Supreme Lord according to their convictions and their spiritual understanding. Each process of worship involves
the understanding of different Forms of the Lord, as mentioned in the Scriptures, but the ultimate idea is to worship the Supreme Lord Himself.

In the feature of His Vaibhavaprakash the Lord manifests Himself as Valaram. The feature of Valaram is as good as Krishna; the difference is that
Krishna is blackish and Valaram is whitish. The Vaibhavaprakash Form was
also displayed when Krishna appeared in the four-handed Form of Narayana
before Devaki when He entered this world, and then at the request of His
parents He transformed Himself into a two-handed Form. Therefore, sometimes He becomes four-handed and sometimes He becomes two-handed.
When He is in a Form of two hands, that is actually Vaibhavaprakash, and
when He is four-handed, that is Vrabhavavilasa. In His Personal Form He is
just like a cowherd boy, and He thinks Himself that; but when He is in the
Vasudeva Form He thinks Himself the son of a Kshatriya, and He feels Himself also to be a Kshatriya, a princely administrator.

Form, Opulence, Beauty, Wealth, Attractiveness and Pastimes are fully
exhibited in His Form as the Son of Nanda. In some of the Vaishnava literature
it is found that sometimes, in His Form as Vasudeva, He becomes attracted
to the Form of Govinda in Vrindaban. Sometimes, as Vasudeva, He desires
to enjoy as Govinda does, although the Govinda Form and the Vasudeva
Form are one and the same. There is a passage in the Laleeta Madhava, Fourth
Chapter, in which Krishna addresses Uddhava as follows: “My dear friend,
this Govinda Form as a cowherd boy attracts Me. I wish to be like the damsels
of Vraja, attracted by this Govinda Form.” Similarly, in the Eighth Chapter,
Krishna says: “O how wonderful It is! Who is this Personality? After seeing
Him I am attracted by Him, so that now I am desiring to embrace Him just
like Radhika.” When this Form of Krishna becomes a little differentiated, it
is called Tadekatma.

In this Tadekatmarupa Form there are two divisions also: One is called
Svamsa. Both in the Vilasa and Svamsa Forms there are again many differential
features, which are also divided into Prabhava and Baibhava. As far as the
Vilasa Forms are concerned, there are innumerable Prabhava Vilasas: Krishna
expands Himself as Vasudeva, Samkarshan, Pradyumna, Aniruddha. Sometimes the Lord thinks Himself a cowherd boy, and sometimes He thinks
Himself the son of Vasudeva, a Kshatriya—and this “thinking” of Krishna
is called “Pastimes.”

In His Prabhava Prakasa and Prabhava Vilasa He is in the same Form, but
66 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

appears differently as Krishna and Valadeva. His expansion as Vasudeva,
Samkarshan, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, mentioned above, is in the Original
Chaturvuha, or four-armed Forms.

There are innumerable four-armed manifestations in different planets
and different places. For instance, these four-armed manifestations are both
in Dwarka and Mathura eternally. And from these four Forms originally there
are the principle twenty-four Forms, named differently in terms of the different
adjustments of the symbols held in the hands—and they are called Baibhava
Vilasa. The same four Formal manifestations of Krishna are on each planet
of the Spiritual Sky, called the Narayan Loka or Vaikuntha Loka. In the Vaikuntha Loka He is manifested in a four-handed Form, called Narayan. And
from each Narayan there is a manifestation of the four Forms mentioned
above (Vasudeva, Samkarshan, Pradyumna and Aniruddha). Therefore,
Narayan is in the center, and the four Forms surround the Narayan Form.

Each of the four Forms again expands into three, and they all have their
different Names, beginning from Kesava. They are twelve in all. Such Forms
are known by different Names according to the different placements of the
symbols in the hands of Narayan.

As far as the Vasudeva Form is concerned, the three expansions are Kesava,
Narayana, and Madhava. The three Forms of Govinda are known as Govinda,
Vishnu, and Sri Madhusudan. It should be noted, however, that this Govinda
Form is not the same Govinda Form as manifested in Vrindaban (as the Son
of Nanda). Similarly, Pradyumna is also divided into three Forms known as
Trivikrama, Vamana, and Sridhar; and, similarly, there are three Forms of
Aniruddha, known as Hrishikesha, Padmanava and Damodara.
CHAPTER SEVEN

  
  
 

wh —_
a —
DS
—— Wz a
ee a —_
Seas {N=
——. q a.
2M >
Ta |\ i

Unlimited Forms of Godhead

These twelve different Vaikuntha Forms of Lord Krishna are known as
the predominating deities for the twelve months. According to the Vaishnava
almanac, the months are called by the different Names of Krishna. This calendar begins from the month of Margasirsa, equivalent to late October-November. The month of November is known by the Vaishnavas as Kesava.
December is called Narayan. January is called Madhab, and February is
Govinda. March is Vishnu, April Vasudeva, May Trivikram and June
Vamana. July is called Sridhar; August Hrishikesha, September is called
Padmanava and October is Damodar.

This Damodar is different from the Damodar in Vraja. The Name Damodar
was given when Krishna was bound by ropes by His mother—but the Damodar Form in the month of October is a different manifestation. Similarly, the
Vaishnava community marks different parts of the body and each mark is
known by one of these twelve different Names of the Supreme Lord. The
mark on the forehead is called Kesava, and on the belly, the breast and on the
arms there are different Names, the same as those of the months.

67
68 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

The four Forms, Vasudeva, Samkarshan, Pradyumna and Aniruddha,
are also expanded in the Vilasa Murti. These are eight in number, and their
Names are Purushottam, Achyuta, Nrishingha, Janardana, Hari, Krishna,
Adhoksaja and Upendra. Out of these eight Names, two Names, Adhoksaja
and Purushottam, are the Vilasa or Forms of Vasudeva. Similarly, Upendra
and Achyuta are the Forms of Samkarshan; Nrishingha and Janardana are the
Vilasa Forms of Pradyumna; and Hari and Krishna are the two Vilasa Forms
of Aniruddha. This Krishna is different from the original Krishna.

These twenty-four Forms are known as the Vilasa manifestation of the
Pravhav (four-handed) Form, and they are differently named according to the
different position of the symbolic representations, that is, the mace, the disc,
the lotus flower and the conch shell. Out of these twenty-four Forms, there
is also a division of Vilasa and Baibhava. Names mentioned herein, such as
Pradyumna, Trivikram, Vamana, Hari and Krishna are also different in features. Then, coming to the Prahava Vilasa of Krishna, which is Vasudeva,
Samkarshan, Pradyumna and Aniruddha; there are a total of twenty further
variations. All of them have Vaikuntha planets in the Spiritual Sky, which are
situated in eight different directions. And, although each of them is eternally
in the Spiritual Sky, still, some of them manifest in the material world also.

In the Spiritual Sky all the planets dominated by the feature of Narayan
are eternal. And the topmost planet in the Spiritual Sky is called Krishna Loka.
That Krishna Loka is divided into three different portions: Gokula, Mathura,
and Dwarka. In the Mathura portion the Form of Kesava is always situated.
He is also represented on this earthly planet. In India there is a place called
Mathura where Kesava Murti is worshipped and, similarly, there is a Purushottam Form in Jagannath Puri in Orissa. In Anandaranya there is the
Form of Vishnu, and in Mayapur, the birthplace of Lord Chaitanya, there is
the Form of Hari. Many other Forms are situated elsewhere on this earthly
planet.

Not only in this Universe, but in all the other Universes such Forms are
distributed everywhere. On this earthly planet also it is indicated that all the
world is divided into seven islands, and it is understood that on each and every
island there are similar Forms. But at the present moment they are found
only in India. They are indicated to be in other parts of the world, but at
present there is no information telling where they are situated. But from Vedic
literature we can understand that there are Forms in other parts of the world.

These different Forms of Krishna are distributed all over the world and
the Universes to give pleasure to the devotees. Not that the devotees are only
Unlimited Forms of Godhead 69

born in India. Actually, in all parts of the world, there are devotees who have
simply forgotten their identity. Such Forms-incarnate come not only to give
pleasure to the devotee but to re-establish devotional service, and to perform
other activities which vitally concern the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Some of them are incarnations as mentioned in the Scriptures, such as the
Vishnu incarnation, Trivikram incarnation, Nrishingha incarnation and
Vamana incarnation.

In the Siddhartha Samhita there is a description of the twentyfour Forms
of Vishnu, named differently in terms of the different symbolic representations
in the four hands. When describing the different positions of paraphernalia
in the hands of Vishnu Murti, the counting should begin first with the lower
right hand, then to the upper right hand, next to the upper left hand and,
lastly, to the lower left hand. In this way Vasudeva is represented by club,
conch shell, wheel and lotus flower. Samkarshan is represented by club, conch
shell, lotus flower and wheel. Similarly, Pradyumna is represented by wheel,
conch shell, club and lotus flower. Aniruddha is represented by wheel, club,
conch shell and lotus flower.

In the Spiritual Sky the representations of Narayan, twenty in number,
are calculated as follows: Hrishikesha is represented by conch shell, wheel,
flower and club. Narayan is represented by conch shell, lotus flower, club
and wheel. Sri Madhava is represented by club, wheel, conch shell and lotus
flower. Sri Govinda is represented by wheel, club, lotus flower and conch
shell. Vishnu Murti is represented by club, lotus flower, conch shell and wheel.
Madhusudan is represented by wheel, conch shell, lotus flower and club.
Trivikram is represented by lotus flower, club, wheel and lotus flower.
Sridhar is represented by lotus flower, wheel, club and conch shell. Padmanava
is represented by conch shell, lotus flower, wheel and club. Damodar is represented by lotus flower, wheel, club and conch shell. Purushottam is represented
by wheel, lotus flower, conch shell, and club. Sri Achyuta is represented by
club, lotus flower, wheel and conch shell. Sri Nrishingha is represented by
wheel, lotus flower, club and conch shell. Janardan is represented by lotus
flower, wheel, conch shell and club. Sri Hari is represented by conch shell,
wheel, lotus flower and club. Sri Krishna is represented by conch shell, club,
lotus flower and wheel. Adhoksaja is represented by lotus flower, club, conch
shell and wheel. Upendra is represented by conch shell, club, wheel and lotus
flower.

 

According to Hayasirsha Pancharatra there are sixteen Forms, and they are
all different in Name, in terms of the wheel and club being differently situated.
70 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

The conclusion is that the Supreme Original Personality of Godhead is
Krishna—He is called Leela Purushottam, and He is principally in Vrindaban
as the Son of Nanda. It is also learned from the Hayasirsha Pancharacha that
nine forms are protecting two Puris, known as the Mathura Puri and the
Dwarka Puri: the four Forms of Vasudeva, Samkarshan, Pradyumna, and
Aniruddha, and besides these four Forms, there are Narayan Forms, Nrishingha Forms, Hayagriva Forms, Varaha Forms and Brahma. The above
descriptions are different manifestations of the Prakasa and Vilasa Forms of
Lord Krishna.

Now Lord Chaitanya informs Sanatan Goswami that there are different
Forms of the Svamsa also: Svamsa Forms are divided into the Samkarshan
division and the incarnation division. From the Samkarshan division come
the three Purusha Avatars: the Karanodakshayee Vishnu, Garbhodakshayee
Vishnu and Kshirodakshayee Vishnu. The other division is called Leela avatars,
such as the Lord’s incarnation as a Fish, as a Tortoise, etc.

There are six kinds of incarnations: 1. the Purusha Avatar incarnations, 2.
the Leela Avatar incarnation, 3. the Guna Avatar, 4. the Manu Avatar, 5. the
Yuga Avatar, and 6. the Saktavesh Avatar. Out of six kinds of Vilasa manifestations of Krishna there are two divisions based on His age. They are called
Balya and Pauganda. The original Form of Krishna as the Son of Nanda
enjoys in two Forms of childhood, namely Balya and Pauganda.

The conclusion is that there is no end to the expansions and incarnations of
Krishna. Here Lord Chaitanya describes some of them to Sanatan just to give
him an idea of how the Lord is expanding and how He is enjoying. This is
confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam, in the First Canto, Third Chapter. It is
said there that there is no limit to the emanations of incarnations of the Supreme
Lord, just as there is no limit to the waves of the ocean.

Krishna’s first incarnation is as the three Purusa Avatars, namely the Maha
Vishnu (or Karanodakshayee) Avatar, Garbhodakshayee Avatar and Kshirodakshayee Avatar. This is confirmed in the Sasvata, Tantra.

Krishna’s energies are also divisible into three: His energy of thinking,
His energy of feeling, and His energy of acting. In His energy of thinking He is
the Supreme Lord, in His energy of feeling He is Lord Vasudeva, and in His
energy of acting He is Samkarshan Valaram. Without thinking, feeling, and
acting there could be no possibility of the Creation. Although there is no
creation of the Spiritual World, yet there is the creation of this material world.
But both the Spiritual World and the material world are manifestations of the
energy of acting—in the Form of Samkarshan and Valaram—of Krishna.
Unlimited Forms of Godhead 71

The Spiritual World, the Vaikuntha planets and Krishna Loka, is situated
in His energy of thinking. Although there is no creation of the eternal Spiritual
World, still it is to be understood that they depend on the thinking energy
of the Supreme Lord. This thinking energy is described in the Brahma Samhita,
Fifth Chapter, second verse. It is said there that the Supreme Abode, known
as Goloka, is manifested just like a lotus flower with hundreds of petals. Everything is manifested by the Ananta or Valaram or Samkarshan Form. The
material cosmic manifestation and the different Universes are manifest through
the Maya, or material energy. The material Nature or material energy is not
the cause of all this cosmic manifestation. It is caused by the Supreme Lord,
by His different expansions through the material Nature; and without the
superintendence of the Supreme Lord there is no possibility of any creation.

The Form by which the energy of the material Nature works to bring
about creation is called Samkarshan. It is understood that under the superintendent energy of the Supreme Lord this cosmic manifestation is created.
The example is given: iron becomes hot in contact with fire, and when it is
red hot, it is just like fire.

In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Forty-sixth Chapter, it is said that
Rama and Krishna are the Origin of all living entities. These two Personalities
enter into everything. A list of the incarnations occurs in the Srimad Bhagwatam, First Canto, Third Chapter, as follows: 1. Kumaras, 2. Narada, 3.
Varaha, 4. Matsya, 5. Yajna, 6. Naranarayan, 7. Kardemikapeel, 8. Duttatreya,
9. Hayasirsha, 10. Hansa, 11. Dhruvapriya Prishni Garva, 12. Rishava, 13.
Prithu, 14. Nrishingha, 15. Kurma, 16. Dhanvantari, 17. Mohini, 18. Vamana,
19. Bhargava, 20. Raghavendra, 21. Vyas, 22. Pralambari Valarama, 23. Krishna,
24. Buddha, 25. Kalki. Almost all of these twenty-five Leela Avatars appear
in one day of Brahma, which 1s called a Kalpa, and sometimes they are called
Kalpa Avatars. Out of these, the incarnation of Hansa Mohini is not permanent;
but Kapila, Dattatreya, Rishava, Dhanvantari and Vyas are five eternal Forms,
and they are more celebrated. The incarnations of the Tortoise, the Fish,
Naranarayan, Baraha, Hayagriva, Prisnigarbha, and Valadeva are considered
as incarnations of Vaibhava. Similarly, there are three incarnations of the
qualitative modes of Nature. They are called Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva.

Of the Manvantara Avatars, there are fourteen: 1. Yajna, 2. Bibhu, 3. Satyasen,
4. Hari, 5. Vaikuntha, 6. Arjita, 7. Vaman, 8. Sarbabhouma, 9. Rishava, ro.
Viswaksen, 11. Dharmasetu, 12. Sudhama, 13. Yogeswar, 14. Vrihatbhanu.
Out of these fourteen Manvatar incarnations, Yajna and Vamana are also Leela
Avatars. The balance are Pastime Manvantar Avatars. These fourteen Manvantar
72, Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Avatars are also known as Bhaiva Avatars.

The four Yuga Avatars are also described in the Bhagwatam: in the Satya
Yuga the incarnation of God is white, in the Treta Yuga the incarnation of God
is red, in the Dvarpara Yuga the incarnation of God is blackish; and the incarnation in the Kali Yuga is also blackish, but sometimes in a special Kali Yuga the
color is yellowish. So far as the Saktavesh Avatars are concerned, they include
Kapila and Rishava, the Saktavesh Avatar, Ananta, Brahma (sometimes the Lord
Himself becomes Brahma), Satyasen as the incarnation of knowledge, Narada
as the incarnation of devotional service, King Prithu as the incarnation of
administrative power and Rishava as the incarnation of subduing evil principles.
CHAPTER EIGHT

  

Nl
SI a
a ae ns
= [/ £ S/F
=i >

The Avataras

Lord Chaitanya continued: The expansions of Lord Krishna Who come
to the material Creation are called Avataras or incarnations. Avatara means one
who descends from the higher Spiritual Sky. In the Spiritual Sky there are
innumerable Vaikuntha planets, and from such a planet the expansion of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead comes into this Universe, and therefore
He is called Avatara. Avataran means to descend.

The first descent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from the expansion of Samkarshan is the Purusha incarnation. This is confirmed in the Srimad
Bhagwatam, both in the First Canto, Third Chapter, as well as in the Sixth
Chapter. It is said there that the Supreme Personality of Godhead descends
as the first Purusha incarnation for the material Creation, and He immediately
manifests sixteen elementary energies. He is known as Maha Vishnu, lying
on the Causal Ocean, and He is the Original incarnation in the material world.
He is the Lord of time, Nature, cause and effect, mind, ego, and the five
elements, the three modes of nature, the senses, and the Universal Form. He is

73
74. Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

independent, and the Master of all objects movable and immovable in the
material world.

The influence of material Nature cannot reach beyond the Viroja, or
Causal Ocean, and this is confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Second Canto,
Ninth Chapter. On the Vaikuntha planets there is no influence of the modes
of material Nature. There is no mixture of the modes of goodness, passion,
and ignorance, and neither is there any influence of material time. On those
planets the liberated associates of Krishna live eternally, and they are worshipped both by the demigods and the demons.

The material Nature acts in two capacities, as Maya and Pradhana. Maya
is the direct cause and Pradhana means the elements of material manifestation. The first Purusha Avatara, Maha Vishnu, glances over the material
Nature and thereby the material Nature becomes agitated, and the Purusha
Avatara thus impregnates matter with the living entities. By this glancing,
consciousness is created, and consciousness is known as Maha Tattwa. The
predominating deity of Maha Tattwa is Vasudeva. Consciousness is then
divided into three departmental activities, under the three gunas, or modes of
material Nature. Consciousness in the mode of goodness is described in the
Srimad Bhagwatam Eleventh Canto, and the predominating deity is called
Aniruddha. Consciousness in the mode of material passion produces intelligence, and the predominating deity is called Pradyumna. He is the Master
of the senses. Consciousness in the mode of ignorance is the cause of production of the ether, the sky, and the cause of production of the hearing instrument,
the ear. The cosmic manifestation is the combination of all these, and thereby
innumerable Universes are created. Nobody can count how many Universes
there are.

These innumerable Universes are being produced from the pores on the
body of Maha Vishnu. It is also said that, as innumerable atoms are coming
and going through the holes in a window, so from the pores of the body of
Maha Vishnu innumerable Universes emanate. From His breathing also
innumerable Universes are being produced and annihilated. All His energies
are spiritual—they have nothing to do with the material energy. In the Brahma
Samhita this fact is stated also. In the fifth Chapter, 54th verse, it is said that
the predominating deity of each Universe, Brahma, lives only during one
breath of Maha Vishnu. Maha Vishnu again is the original Supersoul of all
the Universes, and He is also the Master of all the Universes. That is the description of the first incarnation, known as Maha Vishnu.

The second Vishnu incarnation enters into each and every Universe. In
The Avataras 75

each and every Universe He spreads water from His body, and on that water
He lies down. From His navel the stem of a lotus flower grows, and on that
lotus flower the first creature, Brahma, is born. Within the stem of that lotus
flower there are fourteen divisions of planetary systems, which are created
by Brahma.

In each Universe the Lord as Vishnu maintains the Universe, tending to
its needs, and although He is within the Universe, the influence of material
energy cannot touch Him. The same Vishnu, when it is required, takes the
Form of Lord Shiva and annihilates the cosmic creation. These three secondary
incarnations; namely, Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, are the predominating
deities of the three modes of material Nature. The second incarnation of
Vishnu, known as Garbhodakshayee, is worshipped as the Hiranygarbha
Supersoul, Who has thousands of heads, as described in the Vedic hymns.
This second incarnation, Garbhodakshayee Vishnu, is the Master of the Universe, and in each Universe there is a manifestation of the Garbhodakshayee
Vishnu. Although He is within the material Nature, still He is not touched
by it.

The third incarnation of Vishnu is also an incarnation of the mode of
goodness. As the Kshirodhakshayee Vishnu, He is also the Supersoul of all
living entities, and He resides on the ocean of milk within the Universe. Thus
Lord Chaitanya described the Purusha Avatars.

He then described the Leela Avatars: He said that there is no limit or counting for the Leela, or “Pastime,” Avatars, but some of them are described by
the Lord, for example: Matsya, Kurma, Raghunath, Nrishingha, Vamana
and Baraha.

A description of the qualitative incarnations of Vishnu, or Guna Avatars,
is as follows: Brahma is one of the living entities, but he is very powerful
on account of his devotional service. Such a primal living entity, by the
influence of the mode of material passion, is situated as Brahma. He is made
powerful by Garbhodakshayee Vishnu directly, and therefore Brahma has
power to create innumerable living entities. A description of Brahma is given
in the Brahma Samhita, Fifth Chapter, soth Verse. Brahma is likened to the
valuable stones influenced by the rays of the Sun, and the Sun is likened to the
Supreme Lord Garbhodakshayee Vishnu. If in some Kalpa there is no suitable
living entity who can act in the position of Brahma, then Garbhodakshayee
Vishnu Himself manifests as Brahma and acts in that way.

Similarly, by expanding Himself as Lord Shiva, He is engaged when there
is a necessity to annihilate the Bramhanda. Lord Shiva, in association with
76 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Maya, has many Forms; generally, they are numbered at eleven. Lord Shiva
is not one of the living entities—he is more-or-less Krishna Himself. The
example is given of the distinction between milk and yogurt. Yogurt is a
preparation of milk, but still yogurt cannot be used as milk. Similarly, Lord
Shiva is an expansion of Krishna, but he cannot act as Krishna, nor can we
derive the spiritual restoration from Lord Shiva that we can derive from
Krishna. The essential difference is that Lord Shiva has a connection with the
material Nature, but Vishnu has nothing to do with the material Nature.
In Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Eighteenth Chapter, it is said that Lord
Shiva is a combination of the three kinds of transformed consciousness, known
as Baikrik, Taijsa and Tamasa.

The Vishnu incarnation, although Master of the modes of goodness within
each Universe, is in no way in touch with the influence of material Nature.
Everything of Vishnu is equal to Krishna, but still Krishna is the original
Source. Vishnu is partial, and Krishna is whole. This is the version of the
Vedic literature. In the Brahma Samhita there is the example of an original
lamp which lights a second lamp; although both the lamps are of equal candle
power, still one is accepted as the original, and the other is said to be kindled
by the original lamp. The Vishnu expansion is like that. He is Vishnu, He is
equally powerful, but the original Vishnu is Krishna. Brahma and Lord Shiva
are obedient servants of the Supreme Lord and the Supreme Lord as Vishnu
is an expansion of Krishna.

After describing the Leela Avatara and Guna Avatara, Lord Chaitanya
then explained to Sanatan Goswami about the Manvantara Avatara. He states
that there is no counting of the Manvantara Avatara. The Manus are fourteen
in one Kalpa, or one day of Brahma. One day of Brahma is calculated at 432
million years, and during that period of time there are fourteen Manus. Brahma
lives for 100 years on this scale. Therefore, during the lifetime of Brahma, if
fourteen Manus appear in one day, then there are 420 Manus during the
month of Brahma, and during the year of Brahma there are 5,040 Manus.
Brahma lives for 100 years, and it is calculated that there are five hundred
four thousand Manus in one Brahma’s duration of life. There are innumerable
Universes, and one can just imagine how many Manvantara incarnations there
are in the total.

The Universes are being produced by the breathing out of Maha Vishnu,
and no one can calculate how many Manus there are at one time. Each Manu
is called by a different name. The first Manu is called Svayambhuba. He is the
son of Brahma personally. The second Manu is called Swarochis; he is the
son of the predominating deity of fire. The third Manu is called Uttam; and
The Avataras 77

he is the son of King Priyabratha. The fourth Manu is called Tamasa; and he
is the brother of Uttama. The fifth Manu is called Raivata. He is the brother
of Tamasa. The sixth Manu is also the brother of Tamasa. The sixth Manu is
called Chaksus; and he is the son of Chaksu. The seventh Manu is called
Baivasvata. He is the son of the Sungod, born of a different wife, whose
name is Chakya. The ninth Manu is called Daksasavarni. He is the son of
Baruna. The tenth Manu is called Brahmasavarni, and he is the son of
Upsloka. Four other Manus are known as Rudrasavarni, Dharmasavarni,
Indrasavarni, and Raichya. All are sons of Lord Shiva.

After finishing the description of the Manu incarnations, the Lord described to Sanatan Goswami the Yuga Avatars. He said that there are four
Yugas, or millennia. The first Yuga is called Satya, the second is called Treta,
the third is called Dvapara, and the fourth is called Kali. In each millennium
the Lord takes different colors in different incarnations. In the Satya Yuga
the color of the principal incarnation is white. In the Treta Yuga the color of
the principal incarnation is red, and in the Dvapara Yuga the color of the
principal incarnation is blackish—Krishna. And, in the Kali Yuga, the color
of the principal incarnation is yellow. This is confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Eighth Chapter, as spoken by Gargamuni while calculating the horoscope of Krishna in the house of Nanda Maharaj.

In the Satya Yuga the process of self-realization is meditation, and this
process of meditation was taught by the incarnation of God in the color of
whiteness. This incarnation gave benediction to the sage Kardum for obtaining, as his son, an incarnation of the Personality of Godhead. In the Satya
Yuga everyone meditates on Krishna, and each and every living entity is in
full knowledge. Other meditations, which are not recommended in this
present age, are still being attempted as meditational processes by people who
are not in full knowledge.

The process for self-realization in the Treta millennium is performance of
different sacrifices, and this is taught by the incarnation of God in His red color.
In the Dvapara millennium, Krishna is Personally present, and He is worshipped
by everyone, and that is the process of self-realization for that age. Krishna
is blackish in color, He is the incarnation Himself, and He induces people to
worship Him, as is stated in the Bhagavad Gita. The Srimad Bhagwatam also,
in the Eleventh Canto, Fifth Chapter, states that the worship of Krishna is
made by the hymn: “Let me offer my obeisances unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Vasudeva.” This is the hymn generally practiced by the people
to worship the Supreme Lord Krishna in the Dvapara millennium.

The next millennium is Kali Yuga, in which we are now. In this age the
78 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Lord incarnates to preach chanting of the Holy Name of Krishna. The Lord
appears in this age in yellowish color, and He teaches people love of God
by chanting the Name of Krishna. The process of teaching is done Personally
by Krishna, and He exhibits His love of Godhead by chanting, singing, and
dancing with thousands of people following Him. This particular incarnation
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is foretold in the Srimad Bhagwatam,
Eleventh Canto, Fifth Chapter; in which it is stated that the Lord incarnates
in the Age of Kali as a devotee, always chanting Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna,
Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

But, it is stated there, His complexion is not like the Krishna of the Dvapara
Yuga. He is always engaged in preaching love of Godhead through the Samkirtan movement, and those who are intelligent adopt this process of selfrealization. It is also stated in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Twelfth Canto, Third
Chapter, that the self-realization which could be achieved in the Satya millennium by meditation, in the Treta millennium by the performance of different
sacrifices, and in the Dvapara millennium by worshipping the Lord Krishna,
could be achieved in the Age of Kali simply by chanting these Holy Names:
Hare Krishna. In the Vishnu Purana also the same thing is confirmed: that for
this age there is no use of meditation or the performance of sacrifices or temple
worship. Simply by chanting the Holy Name of Krishna—Hare Krishna,
Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare—one can achieve perfect self-realization.

When Lord Chaitanya was describing the incarnation in this Age of Kall,
Sanatan Goswami, who had been a government minister and was perfectly
capable of drawing a conclusion, indirectly asked Lord Chaitanya, “How can
one understand the advent of an incarnation?” He could understand that
Lord Chaitanya was the incarnation of Krishna, corroborating the description
of the incarnation of the Kali millennium; and he also could understand that,
in the future, there would be many imitation incarnations following the
incarnation of Lord Chaitanya, because Lord Chaitanya played as an ordinary
Brahmin boy, though His devotees accepted Him as an incarnation. Sanatan
knew there would be many pretenders, and so he inquired from Lord Chaitanya: “How can one understand the symptoms of an incarnation?”

The Lord replied to the inquiry of Sanatan Goswami: “As one can understand different incarnation of different millenniums with reference to the
context of the Vedic literature, similarly, one can understand who is actually
the incarnation of Godhead in this Age of Kali.”

Specially stressed is the reference to authoritative Scriptures: one should
The Avataras 79

try to understand the characteristics of an incarnation with reference to the
Scripture, not whimsically. An incarnation of the Supreme Lord never declares
Himself to be an incarnation. But His followers, with reference to the context
of the authoritative Scriptures, must ascertain who is an incarnation and who
is a pretender.

The real incarnation is described with reference to two features: the principal feature is called Personality, and the other is called the marginal feature. Any
intelligent person can understand the characteristics of an Avatara, or incarnation, by these two features. There is a description of the characteristics of the
body and of the activities. The description of the body is the principal feature
for identifying an incarnation, and the activities are the marginal feature.
This is confirmed in the beginning of Srimad Bhagwatam, where the features
are very nicely described in the 1st verse of the First Canto. In that verse there
are two terms, Param and Satyam. Lord Chaitanya indicated that the words
Param and Satyam show Krishna in His principal feature. The other, marginal
features are that He taught Vedic knowledge to Brahma, and that He incarnates as the Purusha Avatar to create the cosmic manifestation. These are
occasional features for some special purposes.

One should try to understand and distinguish the principal feature and the
marginal feature of an Avatar. Nobody can declare himself an incarnation
without these two features, and therefore, any intelligent man will study the
principal features and marginal features before accepting a pretender. Sanatan
Goswami tried to confirm Lord Chaitanya’s Personal characteristics as those
of the incarnation of this age, and Lord Chaitanya confirmed it—though not
directly. He simply said: “Leave aside all this discussion, let us go on about the
description of the Saktavesh Avatar.”

The Lord then said that there is no limit or counting of Saktavesh Avatars,
but some of them can be mentioned as examples. The Saktavesh incarnation
are of two kinds: one direct, and the other indirect. When the Lord Himself
comes, He is called Shakshat, or direct Saktavesh Avatar, and when He empowers some living entity to represent Him, that one is called indirect, or
Avesa, incarnation.

Examples of indirect Avatars are the four Kumaras, Narada, Prithu, and
Parsuram. They are actually living entities, but there is specific power given
to them by the Supreme Personality of God. Examples of direct, or Shakshat,
Avatar are the Shesha incarnation or Ananta incarnation.

When a specific opulence of the Supreme Lord is invested in some specific
entitics, they are called Avcesa Avatars. The four Kumaras represent the
80 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

specific opulence of knowledge of the Supreme Lord. Narada specifically
represents the devotional service of the Supreme Lord. The devotional service
of the Lord is there also in Lord Chaitanya, Who is considered to be the full
representation of devotional service. In Brahma the opulence of creative power
is invested. In Ananta the power of the sustenance of all the planets is invested.
In the Shesha incarnation the power is in serving the Supreme Lord. And in
King Prithu is the power of maintaining the living entities. Similarly, in
Parsuram the power of killing the evil elements is invested. So far as Vibhuti,
or the special favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is concerned,
there is a description in the Bhagavad Gita, Tenth Chapter. It is said there that
any living entity who appears to be especially powerful or beautiful should
be known as specifically favored by the Supreme Lord.

The Lord, after finishing the description of the Saktavesh incarnation,
began to speak about the age of the Supreme Lord. He said that the Supreme
Lord Krishna is always like a 16-year-old boy, and when He desires to descend
to this Universe, He first of all sends His father and mother, who are His devotees, and then He advents Himself as the incarnation, or comes Personally.
All His activities, beginning from the killing of the Putana demon, are being
displayed in innumerable Universes, and there is no limit to them. At every
moment, at every second, His manifestations of different Pastimes are seen in
the different Brahmandas, or Universes. Therefore, His Pastime activities are
just like the waves of the Ganges River: as there is no limit to the flowing
of the waves of the Ganges, similarly, there is no cessation of the manifestations of the different features of Lord Krishna’s incarnation in different Universes. He displays from childhood many Pastime functions, and ultimately
He exhibits the Rasa Dance.

It is said that all the Pastime functions of Krishna are eternal, and that is
confirmed in every Scripture. People in general cannot understand how
Pastimes are being performed by Krishna, but Lord Chaitanya gave a comparable instance in the orbit of the Sun. According to Vedic astrological
calculation, the twenty-four hours of a day and night are divided into 60
Dandas. The days are again divided into three thousand six hundred Palaas.
So the Sun disc can be perceived in every 60 Palaas, and the time constitutes a
Danda. Eight Dandas make one Parahara, and the Sun rises and sets within four
Paraharas. Similarly, four Paraharas constitute the duration of night, and after
that the Sun is again seen as risen. Similarly, all the Pastimes of Krishna can
be seen in any of the Brahmandas, just like the Sun can be seen in its movement
through three thousand six hundred Palaas.
The Avataras 81

Lord Krishna remains in this Universe for. 125 years only, but all the Pastimes of that period are exhibited in each and every Universe, including His
Appearance, His Boyhood Pastimes, His Youth, and His manifestation of
later Pastimes—until the last at Dwarka. All those Pastimes are present in one
or another of the myriad Brahmandas, at any given time. Therefore the
Pastimes are called eternal. In other words, as the Sun is eternally existing and
we can see it rise and set due to our different planetary position, similarly,
the Lord’s Pastimes are going on, but only at certain intervals can we see the
Pastimes of Krishna in this particular Universe. As described above, His Abode
is the Supreme Planet known as Goloka Vrindaban and, being Absolute, His
Name, Fame, everything is equal to Krishna. And, by the will of Krishna,
the same Goloka Vrindaban is manifested in this Universe and other Universes
also.

Therefore, although the Lord is always in His Supreme Abode, Goloka
Vrindaban, by His Supreme will the activities there are also manifested in the
innumerable Universes; and when He appears, He appears in those particular
places. And in every manifestation of Krishna the six opulences are displayed.
CHAPTER NINE

 

The Opulences of Krishna

Lord Chaitanya is especially merciful to the innocent, unsophisticated
person. His name is Patitpavan, the Deliverer of the most fallen conditioned
soul. A conditioned soul may be fallen to the lowest position, but that does
not prevent him from advancing in spiritual science, provided he is innocent.
Sanatan Goswami was considered to be fallen in the social status because he
was in the service of the Mohammedan government, and had been excommunicated from the Brahmin society. But because he was a sincere soul Lord
Chaitanya showed him special favor by granting him a wealth of information
in the matter of spiritual science.

The Lord next explained to Sanatan Goswami about the situation of different spiritual planets in the Spiritual Sky. The spiritual planets are known as
Vaikuntha planets. The Universes of the material Creation have a limited
length and breadth; but so far as the Vaikuntha planets are concerned, because
they are spiritual, there is no limitation to their dimensions. Lord Chaitanya
informed Sanatan Goswami that the length and breadth of each and every

82
The Opulences of Krishna 83

Vaikuntha planet is hundreds and thousands of millions and billions of miles.
Nobody can measure billions of miles or measure the actual extent of such
Vaikuntha planets. Each of them is unlimitedly expanded, and in each and
every one of them there are residents who are full with all six opulences-wealth, strength, knowledge, beauty, fame, and renunciation. And the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is present in each. In each and every Vaikuntha planet
a different expansion of Krishna has His eternal Abode. And Krishna has His
original eternal Abode on the planet called Krishna Loka, or Goloka Vrindaban.

We have experience in this Universe that even the largest planet is lying
in only one corner of outer space. For example the Sun is supposed to be
some million times bigger than the Earth, and still it lies in one corner of outer
space. Similarly each of the Vaikuntha planets, although unlimited in length
and breadth, lies in some corner of the Spiritual Sky, known as Brahmajyoti.
In the Brahma Samhita this Brahmajyoti is described as Niskla ananta Asesa, or
undivided and unlimited, without any trace of the material modes of Nature.
All the Vaikunthas are like the petals of a lotus flower, and the principal part
of that lotus is the center of all the Vaikunthas, and that is called Krishna Loka,
or Goloka Vrindaban.

Therefore, the expansions of Krishna in various forms as described herein,
as well as His different Abodes on the Spiritual Planets in the Spiritual Sky,
are unlimited. Even demigods like Brahma and Shiva cannot see or even
estimate how many planets there are or how vast is their extension. This is
confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter: “No
one can estimate the length and breadth of all the Vaikuntha planets.” It is
said there that not only the demigods like Brahma and Shiva are unable to
make such an estimate, but also Ananta, Who is an incarnation of the Lord
in His opulence of strength, cannot describe any limitation to the Lord’s
potency, or to the area of the different Vaikuntha planets.

In this connection the prayers of Brahma, mentioned in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, are very convincing. Lord Brahma
says, “O my dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, O Supersoul,
O Master of all Mystic Powers—nobody can know or explain Your potential
expansion through Your Yogamaya energy, which extends all over the three
worlds. The scientist and the learned man cannot even estimate the atomic
constitution of any single planet. They may be able to count the molecules
of snow in the sky, or they may even count the number of stars in the sky,
but no one can estimate how You descend on this Earth or in this Universe,
84 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

with Your innumerable transcendental potencies and energies and qualities.”
Lord Brahma informed Narada that, of all the great sages who were born
before Narada, including he himself, none can understand the potential
strength and energy of the Supreme Lord. So he admitted that if even Ananta,
who has thousands of tongues, tries to estimate the Lord’s potential energy,
he will fail.

Brahma prayed, therefore: “My Lord, You are unlimited, and no one
has estimated the limit to Your potencies. I think that even Your Lordship
does not know the range of Your potential energies. An unlimited number of
planets float in the sky just like atoms, and great Vedantists who are engaged
in research to find You find everything different from You, and at last they
decide that You are everything.”

‘When Lord Krishna was within this Universe, Brahma played a trick
on Him in order to confirm that the cowherd boy in Vrindaban was actually
Krishna. By his power he stole all the cows and calves, and the friends of
Krishna, who were engaged in herding the animals. But when he returned
from hiding them to see the result, he saw that Krishna was playing with the
same cows and calves and cowherd boys; because by His Vaikuntha potency
He had expanded all the stolen cows, calves and friends. He saw millions and
billions of them, and he also saw millions and billions of tons of cane and
fruit, and lotus flowers and horns. And all the cowherd boys were decorated
with different clothes and ornaments, and nobody could count their vast
number. Brahma saw that each of the cowherd boys had become a fourhanded Narayan, like the predominating deity of each Brahmanda, and he
saw that innumerable Brahmas also were engaged in offering obeisances to the
Lord. He also saw that all of them were emanating from the body of Krishna,
and after a second they were also entering into the body of Krishna. Brahma
became struck with wonder by this extraordinary feat of Krishna, and in his
prayer he admitted that anybody and everybody could say that he knows
about Krishna—but so far as he was concerned, he did not know anything
about Krishna. “My dear Lord,” he said, “the potencies and opulences which
You have exhibited just now are beyond the capacity of my mind and understanding.”

Lord Chaitanya then ‘explained that not: only Krishna Loka, but even
Krishna's Abode on this planet, known as Vrindaban, cannot be estimated
in potency. Vrindaban is estimated as thirty-two Scriptural miles, but even
though Vrindaban in India is thirty-two miles, yet in some part of Vrindaban
all the Vaikunthas exist. The area of the present Vrindaban consists of twelve
The Opulences of Krishna 85

forests and is about eighty-four croses, or one hundred sixty-eight miles in
area. But Vrindaban City is estimated at about sixteen croses, or thirty-two
miles.

The Lord again said that the potencies and opulences of Krishna are unlimited. Whatever He told to Sanatan Goswami was only a partial presentation, but by such a partial presentation one can at least imagine the whole.
While Lord Chaitanya was speaking to Sanatan Goswami about the opulences
of Krishna, He was deep in ecstasy, and in that transcendental state He began
to cite a verse from the Srimad Bhagwatam, Third Canto, Second Chapter,
which runs as follows: After the disappearance of Krishna, Uddhava, when he
met Vidura, spoke as follows: “Krishna is the Master of all demigods, including
Lord Brahma, Lord Shiva and the expansion of Vishnu within this Universe.
Therefore, no one is equal to or greater than Him, and He is full in all six
opulences. All the demigods engaged in the administration of each Brahmanda
offer their respectful obeisances, and therefore the helmets on their heads are
beautiful, being decorated with designs of the Lotus Feet of the Supreme
Lord.”

Therefore, as is stated in the Brahma Samhita, Fifth Chapter, 1st Verse,
Krishna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and no one can be equal to
or greater than Him. That is the conclusion. The rulers of this Universe,
known as Brahma, Shiva and Vishnu, although being masters of each and
every Universe, are also servants of the Supreme Lord Krishna.

Lord Krishna is the Cause of all causes. He is also the Cause of the Maha
Vishnu, or the first incarnation controlling this material Creation. From Maha
Vishnu there is Garbhodakshayee Vishnu and Kshirodakshayee Vishnu. Krishna
is the Master of the Garbhodakshayee Vishnu, the Kshirodakshayee Vishnu,
and He is also the Supersoul within every living entity and every Universe.
The Maha Vishnu is described in the Brahma Samhita: Through His breathing
innumerable Universes are produced, and in each Universe there are innumerable Vishnu Tattwas. But Lord Krishna is the Master of Them all; or They
are partial plenary expansions of Krishna.

From revealed Scriptures it is understood that Krishna lives in three transcendental places: The most confidential residence of Krishna is Goloka Vrindaban. There He stays with His father, mother, and friends; and He exhibits
His transcendental relationships and His Mercy amongst His eternal entourage.
There the Yogamaya acts as a maidservant in the matter of His dancing of
Rasa Leela. The residents of the Vrajabhumi think, “The Lord is glorified
by particles of His transcendental mercy and affection, and we, the residents
86 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

of Vrindaban, have not the slightest anxiety on account of His merciful existence.”

It is stated in the Brahma Samhita, Fifth Chapter, 49th verse: all the Vaikuntha planets in the Spiritual Sky are below the planet known as Krishna
Loka. The other planets are known as Vishnu Loka. In that Krishna Loka the
Lord enjoys His transcendental bliss in multiple forms; and all the opulences
of the Vaikunthas are fully displayed in the one Krishna planet. The associates
of Krishna are also full with six opulences. In the Padmollar Khand, Two hundred twenty-fifth Chapter, 57th verse, it is stated that the material energy and the
spiritual energy are separated by water which is called the Viroja River. That
river is flowing from the perspiration of the first incarnation of Purusha. On the
other bank of the Viroja is the eternal Nature, unlimited and all-blissful, called
the Spiritual Sky; which is the Spiritual Kingdom, or the Kingdom of God.

The Spiritual Planets are called “Vaikuntha” because there is no lamentation there, no fear, and everything is eternal. The Spiritual World is calculated
to be three-fourths the energies of the Supreme Lord, and the material world
is one-fourth of His energy. No one can understand this three-fourths, since
even this material world, which is only one-fourth of His energy, cannot be
described. Lord Chaitanya now tried to convey to Sanatan Goswami something about the extent of the one-fourth display of Krishna's energy. In this
connection He cited an incident from Srimad Bhagwatam when Brahma, the
Lord of the Universe, came to see Krishna at Dwarka:

When Brahma, the first creature of this Universe, approached Krishna,
the doorman informed Krishna that Brahma had arrived to see Him. On
hearing this Krishna inquired as to which Brahma had come? The doorman
again came to Brahma and asked him, “Which Brahma are you? Krishna
has asked.”

Brahma was struck with wonder. Why was this question asked by Krishna?
He informed the doorman, “Please tell Him that Brahma who is the father
of the four Kumaras and who has four heads has come to see Him.”

The doorman informed Krishna, and then asked Brahma to come inside.
Brahma offered his obeisances unto the Lotus Feet of Krishna, and Krishna
received him with all honor, and then asked him why he had come, what
his purpose was.

Brahma replied, “I shall speak about my purpose in coming here, but first
I have a doubt. Will You kindly remove it? You have asked through Your
doorman which Brahma has come to see You. So may I inquire if there are
any other Brahmas besides me?”
The Opulences of Krishna 87

On hearing this Krishna smiled, and He at once called for many Brahmas
from many other Universes. The four-headed Brahma then saw many Brahmas coming to see Krishna, and to offer their respects. Some of them had ten
heads, some of them had twenty, some of them one hundred heads, and some
of them a million heads. This four-headed Brahma could not even count
the Brahmas coming to see Krishna to offer their obeisances. Krishna then
called many demigods from other Universes, and all came to offer their respects to the Lord.

Seeing this wonderful exhibition by Krishna, the four-headed Brahma
became nervous, and he began to think that he was just like a mosquito in the
midst of many elephants. All of them came and offered their respectful obeisances unto the Lotus Feet of Krishna, and therefore Brahma thought that
nobody can estimate the unlimited potency of Krishna.

All the helmets of the different demigods and Brahmas shone as they
assembled there, and when combined together there was a great sound of all
of them praying to the Lord. They began to say, “My dear Lord, it is a great
mercy upon us that You have called us to see You. Is there any particular
order? If there is any order, we will carry it out at once.”

Lord Krishna replied, “There is nothing especially required of you, but
I wanted to see you so I called you all together at one time. I offer My blessings
upon you. Don't be afraid of the demons.”

All of them replied that by His mercy, “Everything is all right. There are
no disturbances at the present moment. By Your incarnation everything
inauspicious is vanquished.” As each of the Brahmas saw Krishna, every one
thought Krishna was only within his Universe. After this incident He wished
all the Brahmas farewell, and after offering their respects, they returned to
their respective Universes.

On seeing this, the four-headed Brahma who had come to see Krishna
at once fell down at the Feet of Krishna and said, “What I thought about You
before is all nonsense. Let everyone say that they may know You in perfection, but as far as I am concerned, I cannot even conceive how great You are.
You are beyond my conception, beyond my understanding.”

Krishna then informed the four-headed Brahma; “This particular Universe
is only four thousand million miles broad, but there are many other millions
and billions of Universes which are far, far greater than this one. Some of them
are millions and billions and trillions of miles broad. All these Universes
require similar strong Brahmas; not only four-headed.”

Krishna also informed Brahma, “This is only the one-quarter part of My
88 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

creative potency. The three-quarters part of My creative potency is in the
Spiritual Kingdom.”

The four-headed Brahma then parted from Krishna, after offering his
obeisances; and he could understand what the meaning of the Lord of the
three-quarters energy was.

The Lord is known therefore as Tradhiesa. This name stands for His
principle Abodes; namely, Gokula, Mathura, and Dwarka. These three places
are full of opulences, and Lord Krishna is the Master of them all. Krishna is
therefore situated in His transcendental potency. He is the Master of all transcendental energies, and He is full with six opulences. Because He is the Master
of all opulences, all the Vedic literature acclaims Krishna as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

Lord Chaitanya then sang before Sanatan Goswami a very nice song about
the opulences of Krishna:

“All the Pastimes of Krishna are exactly like the activities of a human
being. Therefore it is to be understood that His Form is like that of a human
being. A human being is an imitation of His Form. His dress is just like a
cowherd boy's, with a flute in His hand, and He seems to be just like a newly
grown youth, always playful, playing just like an ordinary boy.”

The Lord wanted to explain to Sanatan Goswami about the beautiful
aspects of Krishna. He said that if anyone can understand these beautiful
qualities of Krishna, he is dipped into the ocean of nectar. One of Krishna's
potencies is called Yogamaya, which is transcendental and beyond the material
energy, but He exhibits His transcendental potency even within this material
world just to satisfy His confidential devotees. His appearance in this material
world is meant for His devotees. His qualities are so attractive that Krishna
Himself becomes eager to understand Himself. He is fully decorated and
stands with His body curved in three ways, and His eyebrows are always
moving and His eyes are so attractive that all the Gopis become enchanted.
His special Abode is on top of the Spiritual Sky, and He resides there with
His similar associates, the Gopis, and all the Goddesses of Fortune. He is known
there as Madanmohan.

There are many different Pastimes of Krishna such as His Pastime in the
Forms of Vasudeva and Samkarshan. In the material sky His Pastimes are as
the first incarnation of the Purusha, or the Creator of the material world.
There are also Pastimes as the incarnation of the Fish or Tortoise, as manifestations of His incarnation of energies. There are His Pastimes in the Form of
Lord Brahma and Lord Shiva, as the incarnation of the material qualities;
The Opulences of Krishna 89

His Pastimes as King Prithu as an empowered incarnation; His Pastimes as
the Supersoul in everyone's heart; and His Pastimes as the impersonal Brahman.

He has innumerable Pastimes, but the most important Pastimes of Krishna
are His human-like activities, in which He frolics in Vrindaban, dances with
the Gopis, plays with the Pandavas on the Battlefield of Kurukshetra, and
plays in Mathura and Dwarka. The most important part of His exhibition of
Pastimes is in the human Form, especially as a cowherd Boy with flute in
hand and appearing just like a newly grown youth. A partial manifestation
of His Pastimes in Goloka Mathura and Dvaravati, or Dwarka, can overflood
the whole Universe with love of Godhead. Everyone can become attracted
by the beautiful qualities of Krishna.

The manifestation of His internal potency is not even exhibited in the
Kingdom of God, or on the planets of Vaikuntha. But He exhibits that internal
potency within the Universe, by descending from His Personal Abode,
through His inconceivable mercy. Krishna is so wonderful and attractive that
He Himself becomes attracted by His beauty, and that is proof that He is full
of all inconceivable potencies. So far as Krishna’s ornaments are concerned,
when they decorate His body it appears that the ornament does not beautify
Krishna, but that the ornament itself becomes beautiful since it is on His body.
He appears always curved in three ways, and He attracts all the living entities
and all the demigods. He attracts even the Narayan Form in each and every
Vaikuntha planet.
CHAPTER TEN

  
    
 

wil

ed

The Beauty of Krishna

Krishna is known as Madanmohan because He conquers the mind of Cupid.
He is Madanmohan by His favors to the damsels of Vraja, and by accepting
their devotional service. The Lord is engaged there in the Rasa Dance as the
new Cupid, after conquering Cupid’s pride. He is Madanmohan by His
capacity to conquer the minds of women with His five arrows called Form,
Taste, Smell, Sound and Touch. The pearls of the necklace which is hanging
on the neck of Krishna are as white as ducks; and the feather of the peacock
which is decorating the head of Krishna is colored just like the rainbow. His
yellow garment is like lightning in the sky. Krishna is like the newly arrived
clouds; and the Gopis are just like footbells on His feet. When the cloud pours
rain on the grains in the field it appears that Krishna is nourishing the hearts
of the Gopis by calling down His Pastime rain of mercy. The ducks fly in the
sky in the rainy season, and the rainbow is also seen in the sky at that time.
Krishna freely moves with His friends as a cowherd boy in Vrindaban; and

QO
The Beauty of Krishna QI

when He plays His flute all the living creatures, mobile and immobile, become
overwhelmed with ecstasy, and they quiver and tears flow in their eyes.

His conjugal love is the summit of His various opulences. The Lord is the
Master of all riches, all strength, all fame, all beauty, all knowledge, and all
renunciation. Out of these, His perfect beauty is His conjugal attraction. The
Form of Krishna, the conjugal beauty, is eternally existent in Krishna alone,
whereas His other opulences are present in His Narayan Form.

When Lord Chaitanya was describing the superexcellence of Krishna’s
conjugal attraction, He felt a transcendental ecstasy, and caught up the hands
of Sanatan Goswami and began to say how fortunate the damsels of Braja
were. He recited in this connection a verse from Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth
Canto, Twenty-fourth Chapter: “How much penance and austerities the
damsels of Vrindaban must have undergone, for they are able to drink the
nectar of Krishna, Who is All Beauty, All Strength, All Riches, All Fame,
and Who is the center of all the beauties of bodily luster.”

The Body of Krishna, the ocean of the eternal beauty of youth, can be
seen as moving in waves of beauty. And there is a whirlwind at the sound of
His flute. Those waves and that whirlwind make the hearts of the Gopis flutter
like dry leaves on the trees, and when the leaves fall down to Krishna’s Lotus
Feet, they can never rise up again from there. There is no comparison with
that beauty, because no one has beauty greater than, or equal to, Krishna.
He is the Origin of all incarnations, including the Form of Narayan. Otherwise, how could the Goddess of Fortune, who is a constant companion of
Narayan, give up the association of Narayan, and engage herself in penance
for gaining the association of Krishna? This is the superexccllent beauty of
Krishna, the everlasting mine of all beauty. And from that beauty all other
beautiful things emanate.

The attitude of the Gopis is just like a mirror on which the reflection of
Krishna's beauty develops at every moment. Both Krishna and the Gopis
increase their transcendental beauty at every moment, and there is always
transcendental competition between them. Nobody can appreciate the beauty
of Krishna by proper discharge of his occupational duty, or by austerities,
or by mystic Yoga, or by cultivation of knowledge, or by offering different
kinds of prayer. Only those who are on the transcendental platform of love
of God—who only out of love are engaged in devotional service—can appreciate the transcendental beauty of Krishna. Such beauty of Krishna is the
essence of all opulences, and His characteristics in that connection are only
appreciable in Goloka Vrindaban and not anywhere else. In the Form of
92 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Narayan the beauties of mercy, reputation, etc. are all established by Krishna.
But His gentleness and magnanimity cannot be possible in Narayan. They are
found only in Krishna.

Lord Chaitanya very much relished all these verses from Srimad Bhagwatam
which He explained to Sanatan. In particular He explained the verse from the
Ninth Canto, Ninth Chapter, 24th verse, as follows: “The Gopis used to relish
the beauty of Krishna as a ceremony of perpetual enjoyment. They enjoyed
the beautiful Face of Krishna, His beautiful Ears with earrings, His broad
Forehead, and His Smile; and while enjoying the sight of Krishna’s beauty
they used to criticise the defect of the creator, Brahma, for the separation from
their vision of Krishna by the momentary blinking of their eyelids.”

The Vedic hymn which is known as Kamagayatri describes the Face of
Krishna as the king of all moons. In metaphorical language there are many
different moons, and they are all one in Krishna—the moon of the mouth,
the moon of the cheeks, the moon-spots of sandalwood pulp, the beauty moon
of the fingertips of His hand, and the tip of His toes—in this way there are
twenty-four and a half moons, and Krishna is the central figure of all: these
different kinds of moons.

The dancing movement of Krishna’s earrings, eyes, and eyebrows are
very attractive to the damsels of Vraja. Activities in devotional service increase
the sense of devotional service. What else is there for two eyes to see beyond
the face of Krishna? One cannot sufficiently see Krishna with only two eyes;
and one feels incapable and thus becomes bereaved. Such bereavement is
slightly reduced when one criticizes the creative power of the creator. The
unsatiated seer of the face of Krishna then laments as follows:

“I do not have thousands of eyes; I have only two eyes and even these
two eyes are disturbed by the movements of the eyelids. So it is. to be understood that the creator of this body is not very intelligent. He is not conversant
in the art of ecstasy. He is simply a prosaic creator. He does not know how
to fix things in different positions for only seeing Krishna.”

The Gopi’s minds are always engaged in relishing the sweetness of Krishna's
Body. He is the Ocean of beauty, and His beautiful Face, His beautiful Smile,
and the luster of His Body are always attractive to the Gopi’s mind. In the
Krishna Karnamrita these three things have been described as sweet, sweeter,
and sweetest. When there are three kinds of contamination in the constitutional body, it is called convulsion. So, similarly, a perfect devotee of Krishna
attains a stage of convulsion when he is so overwhelmed by seeing the beauty
of Krishna’s Body, His Face, and the beauty of Krishna’s Smile. This ocean of
The Beauty of Krishna 93

transcendental convulsion before Krishna’s beauty sometimes continues
without any treatment, just as with ordinary convulsions a physician does
not allow one to drink water for relief.

The devotee increasingly feels the absence of Krishna, because without Him
one cannot drink the nectar of His beauty. When there is the transcendental
sound of Krishna’s flute, the devotee’s anxiety to hear that flute penetrates
the covering of this material world and enters into the Spiritual Sky, and the
transcendental sound of the flute enters into the ears of the followers of the
Gopis. The sound of Krishna’s flute always resides within the ear of the Gopis,
and increases their ecstasy. At the time when it is heard no other sound can
enter into the ear, and in their family activities they are not able to reply
properly because all these beautiful sounds are vibrating.

Thus Lord Chaitanya explained the transcendental constitution of Krishna,
His expansions, His bodily luster, and everything connected with Him. In
short, Lord Chaitanya explained Krishna as He is. And, Krishna being the
essence of everything, He began to explain the process by which one can
approach Krishna. He said that devotional service to Krishna is the only process.
This is the verdict of all Vedic literature. The sages have declared as follows:
“If somebody inquires into the Vedic literature as to what is the process of
transcendental realization, or if somebody consults the Puranas (which are
considered the sister literature)—in all of them the conclusion is that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna, is the Object of worship.”

Krishna is the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
He is situated in His internal potency, which is known as Swarupshakti or Atmashakti, as described in the Bhagavad Gita. He expands Himself in various multiple Forms. Some of them are known as Personal Forms, and some of them
are known as separated Forms. Thus He is enjoying in all the spiritual planets
as well as in the material Universes.

The expansions of His separated Forms are called living entities, and they
are classified according to the energies of the Lord. Such living entities are
divided into two classes: one is eternally liberated, and the other is cternally
conditioned. Eternally liberated living entities never come into contact with
the material Nature, and they do not have any experience of material life.
They are eternally engaged in Krishna Consciousness, or devotional service
to the Lord, and they are counted as associates of Krishna. Their pleasure, the
only enjoyment of their life, is derived by rendering transcendental loving
service to Krishna.

Those who are eternally conditioned, on the other hand, are ever divorced
Q4 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

from the transcendental loving service of Krishna, and thus they are subjected
to the three-fold miseries of material existence. On account of the conditioned
soul's eternally existing attitude of divorce from Krishna, the spell of material
energy awards him two kinds of bodily existence: one is the gross body,
consisting of the five elements, and the other is the subtle body, consisting
of mind, intelligence, and ego. Because he is covered by these two kinds of
bodies, the conditioned soul is eternally suffering the pangs of material existence, known as the three-fold miseries. We are subjected to six kinds of
enemies, such as lust and anger, etc., and that is the everlasting disease of the
conditioned soul.

Diseased and conditioned, the living entity is transmigrating all over the
Universe. Sometimes he is situated in the upper planetary system, and sometimes he is travelling in the lower planetary system. That becomes his normal
conditioned life. This disease can be cured only when the expert physician,
the bona fide Spiritual Master, is met and followed. When the conditioned
soul faithfully follows the instructions of such a bona fide Spiritual Master,
the material disease is cured and the living entity is promoted to the liberated
stage, and again attains to the devotional service of Krishna, and goes back
Home, back to Krishna.

A conditioned living entity should come to the consciousness of his real
position. He should pray to the Lord: how long and how much will I be under
the rule of the different bodily functions, such as lust and anger? As masters
of the conditioned soul, lust and anger are never merciful; and there is no
cessation of the conditioned soul’s service to such bad masters. When he comes
to his real consciousness, or Krishna Consciousness, he gives up serving those
bad masters and approaches Krishna with a frank and open heart to achieve
His shelter. Then he prays to Krishna to be engaged in His transcendental
loving service.

In the Vedic literature fruitive activities have sometimes been highly praised,
and sometimes the mystic process of Yoga is praised; and, sometimes, the
speculative search for knowledge is praised. They are each considered as a
different way to self-realization. But in spite of praise for the different paths
of self-realization, in every writing the path of devotional service has been
accepted as the foremost. In other words, devotional service to Lord Krishna
is the highest perfectional path of self-realization, recommended to be performed directly. The effects of fruitive activities, mystic meditation, and the
cultivation of speculative knowledge are not direct methods of self-realization.
They are indirect methods because without the addition of devotional service
The Beauty of Krishna 95

none of these recommended paths can lead to the highest perfection of selfrealization. Therefore, such paths to self-realization are ultimately dependent
on the path of devotional service.
CHAPTER ELEVEN

 

Service to the Lord

Any recommended path for self-realization can be successful only when
it is mixed with devotional service. This was explained by Narada Muni, the
Spiritual Master of Vyasadeva, when Vyasadeva was not satisfied even after
compiling heaps of books of Vedic knowledge. Vyasadeva was sitting in a
state of depression by the banks of the River Saraswati when Narada Muni
arrived. Upon seeing Vyasa so dejected, he explained the deficiency in the
compilation of his various books. He said as follows:

“Even pure knowledge without being completed by transcendental devotional service does not look well. What to speak of fruitive activities when they
are not in devotional service? How can they be of any benefit to the performer?”

There are many sages who are expert in performing austerities; there are
many men who give much in charity; there are many famous men, scholars
and thinkers; and those who are very expert in the Vedic hymns. All such
achievements are certainly very auspicious, but unless they are utilized for

96
Service to the Lord 07

attaining devotional service to the Lord, they are unable to award the desired
results. Therefore, in Srimad Bhagwatam, Sukadeva Goswami offered his
respectful obeisances to the Supreme Lord, Who is the only One Who can
award such success.

It is accepted by all classes of philosophers and transcendentalists that no
one who lacks knowledge can be liberated from the material entanglement.
Still, knowledge without being mixed with devotional service holds no possibility of awarding liberation. In other words, when Jnana, or the cultivation
of knowledge, opens the path of devotional service, then alone can it give
one liberation, and not otherwise.

In the Srimad Bhagwatam this is also stated by Brahma: “My dear Lord,
devotional service unto You is the best path for self-realization. If somebody
gives up that path and becomes engaged in the cultivation of knowledge, or
in speculation, he will undergo a troublesome process, without achieving
any desired results. Just as a person who beats the empty husk of the wheat
cannot get the grain, so those who are engaged simply in speculative knowledge
cannot achieve the desired result of self-realization. Their only gain is trouble.”

The Bhagavad Gita says, in the Seventh Chapter, 14th verse, that this
material Nature is very strong, and not surmountable by an ordinary living
entity. Only those who surrender unto the Lotus Feet of Krishna can cross
over the ocean of material existence. The self-forgetfulness of the living entity
—forgetting that he is eternally the servitor of Krishna—is the cause of his
bondage in conditional life, and the cause of his being attracted by the material
energy. That attraction is the shackle of material energy. It is very difficult
for a person to become free as long as he desires to lord it over the material
Nature. It is recommended, therefore, that one should approach a Spiritual
Master who can train him in devotional service, and thus he can get out of the
clutches of material Nature, and achieve the Lotus Feet of Krishna.

There are divisions of human society, like the Brahmins, or intellectuals; the
Kshatriyas, administrators; the Vaishyas, businessmen; and the Sudras, or laborers; and there is the Brahmachary, or student, the Grihastha or householder, the
Vanaprasthas, retired; and the Sannyasis, renounced life. And, in every case,
if the individuals lack engagement in devotional service, Krishna Consciousness, even though engaged in their prescribed duty, they cannot get release
because of their material consciousness. On the contrary, even by discharging
their prescribed duties, they glide down to hell. Therefore, all persons engaged
in their prescribed occupational duties must cultivate Krishna Consciousness
in devotional service, if they want liberation from the material clutches.
98 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

In this connection, Lord Chaitanya cited a verse from the Srimad Bhagwatam
which was delivered by Narada as the path of Bhagavat cultivation. He said
that the four divisions of human social life, as well as the four different orders
of life, are born out of the gigantic Form of the Lord: the Brahmins are born
out of the mouth of the Universal Form of the Lord, the Kshatriyas are born
out of the arms of His Personality, the Vaishyas are born out of His waist,
and the Sudras are born from the legs of that Personality. As such, they are
qualified in different modes of material Nature, within the Form of Virata
Purusha. Out of these four orders of life, or social divisions, if anyone is not
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord, then in spite of his being in his
prescribed occupational, functional duty, he falls from his position.

Lord Chaitanya says that those of the Mayavadi, or impersonalist, school
may artificially think themselves as one with God, or liberated, but according
to Him and to Srimad Bhagwatam, they are not actually liberated. In this connection, He quoted a verse from the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Second
Chapter, in which it is said: “Those who think that they are liberated in the
Mayavadi philosophical way, but who do not take to the devotional service
of the Lord, even after undergoing the severest type of penance or austerity,
and even after sometimes approaching the Supreme post, still, for want of
devotional service, fall.”

The Lord explained that Krishna is just like the Sun, and Maya, or the
illusory material energy, is just like darkness. Therefore, one who is constantly
in the sunshine of Krishna does not have any chance of being deluded by the
darkness of material energy. This is very nicely explained in the four prime
verses of Srimad Bhagwatam, and is also confirmed in the Second Canto of
Srimad Bhagwatam, Fifth Chapter, which states: “The illusory energy, or Maya,
is ashamed to stand before the Lord.”

But the living entities are constantly being bewildered by the same illusory
energy. The living entity in his conditioned state discovers many kinds of
word-jugglery for getting apparent liberation from the clutches of Maya;
but actually a person who sincerely surrenders unto Krishna even by saying
only once, "My dear Lord Krishna, from this day, I am yours,” at once gets
out of the clutches of the material energy.

This is confirmed in the Ramayan, Lankakanda. There the Lord says, “It is
My duty and vow that if somebody surrenders unto Me without any reservation, then I give him all protection.” Somebody may develop the idea of
enjoying fruitive activities, or liberation, or Jnana, or perfection in the Yoga
system, but if such a person by chance becomes very intelligent, then he will
Service to the Lord 99

give up all those paths and engage himself in sincere devotional service to the
Lord. The Bhagwatam also confirms, in the Second Canto, Third Chapter,
that a person—whatever he may be, either full with all desires for material
enjoyment or desirous of liberation—if he is actually intelligent, should engage
himself in perfect devotional service.

Persons who are ambitious for deriving material benefit from devotional
service are not pure devotees, but because they are engaged in devotional
service they are considered fortunate. They do not know that the result of
devotional service is not material benediction; but, because they engage
themselves in devotional service of the Supreme Lord, ultimately they will
come to the understanding that material enjoyment is not the result of engagement in His devotional service. Krishna says that such persons, engaged in
His devotional service, are certainly foolish for wanting some material benefit
in exchange. Such persons are foolish because, instead of achieving the stage
of love of Godhead, they try to accept something which is poisonous for them.
Although such persons want material benefit from Krishna, Krishna being
All-powerful considers the person’s position and gradually liberates him from
such an ambitious life, and engages him in devotional service. And when he
is actually in devotional service he forgets his past ambitions and desires for
material benefits.

In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Fifth Canto, Nineteenth Chapter, this is confirmed as follows: “Lord Krishna certainly fulfills the desire of His devotees
who come to Him in devotional service. But He does not fulfill such desires
as would again cause miseries. In spite of being materially ambitious, because
they are engaged in the transcendental service of the Lord, such devotees are
gradually purified of desire for material enjoyment, and come to desire the
pleasure of devotional service.”

Generally people come to the association of devotees for mitigating some
material wants. But the influence of a pure devotee frees a man from all material
desires, and he relishes the taste of devotional service. Devotional service is
so nice and pure that it purifies the devotee, and he forgets all material ambitions as he engages fully in the transcendental loving service of Krishna. A
practical example is Druva Maharaj, who wanted something from Krishna,
and for that reason engaged in devotional service. But when the Lord appeared
as four-handed Vishnu before Druva, he said, “My dear Lord, I engaged
myself in Your devotional service with great austerity and penances, and thus
I am now seeing You. It is always very difficult to see You, even for the great
demigods and great sages, and I am now pleased and all my desires are satisfied.

 
100 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

I do not want anything further. While I was searching for some broken glass,
I have found a great and valuable gem.” Druva Maharaj stated his full satisfaction, and he refused to ask anything from the Lord.

The living entity who is transmigrating through the 8,400,000 species
of life is sometimes likened to a log which is gliding downstream on the
waves of the river. Sometimes, by chance, the log comes to the shore and it is
saved from being forced to drift further downstream. There is a nice verse
in the Srimad Bhagwatam in which every conditioned soul is encouraged:
“Nobody should be depressed, thinking that he will never be out of the
clutches of matter; because there is the possibility of being rescued exactly
like the log which floats on the river for some time, and then comes to rest
on the bank.” This fortunate opportunity is also discussed here by the Lord.

Such fortunate incidents are considered the beginning of the decline of
one’s conditional life. They occur if there is the association of pure devotees
of the Lord. By association of pure devotees of the Lord, one actually develops
his attraction for Krishna. There are different types of rituals and activities:
some of them develop into material enjoyment, and some of them develop
into material liberation. If a living entity takes to ritualistic activities which
develop into his pure devotional service to the Lord, in the association of pure
devotees, then he naturally develops devotional service in his mind.

There is a nice verse in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Fifty-first
Chapter, where it is stated by Muchakunda: “My dear Lord, a living entity,
while travelling in this material world through different species of life, may
develop towards liberation. By chance he may come in contact with pure
devotees. Only at that time is he liberated from the clutches of the material
energy, and he becomes a devotee of Yourself, the Personality of Godhead.”

When a conditioned soul becomes a devotee of Krishna, Krishna by His
causeless Mercy trains him in two ways: He trains him by the Spiritual Master
from the outside, and He trains him from the inside by the Supersoul. In this
connection there is a very nice verse in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Eleventh Canto,
Twenty-ninth Chapter, in which it is said: “O my dear Lord, if somebody
should get a duration of life like Brahma’s, still he would be unable to express
his gratitude to You for the benefits derived from remembering You; because,
out of Your causeless mercy, You drive away all inauspicious conditions for
a devotee, expressing Yourself from outside as the Spiritual Master, and from
inside as the Supersoul.”

Somehow or other, if somebody gets in touch with a pure devotee and
thus develops a desire for devotional service to Krishna, he gradually rises
Service to the Lord IOI

up to the platform of love of Godhead, and thus he is freed from the clutches
of the material energy. This is explained in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Eleventh
Canto, Twentieth Chapter, where the Lord says: “For one who becomes
attracted by the topics of My Activities out of his own accord—being neither
lured nor repelled by material activities—the path of devotional service, leading to the perfection of love of God, becomes possible.”

It is not possible, however, to achieve such a stage of perfection without
being favored by a pure devotee, or a Mahatma, a great soul. Without the
mercy of a great soul no one can even be liberated from the material clutches,
what to speak of rising to the platform of love of Godhead? This is confirmed
in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Fifth Canto, Eleventh Chapter, spoken in connection
with the meeting of the King Rohugana of the Sind province in Siberia with
King Bharata. The King expressed surprise at seeing Bharata’s great stage of
spiritual perfection in life.

Bharata replied: “My dear Rohugana, no one can attain the perfected
stage of devotional service without being favored by a great soul, or pure
devotee. No one can attain such perfectional stages simply by following the
regulative principles of Scriptures, nor by acceptance of the renounced order
of life, nor by prosecuting the prescribed duties of householder life, nor by
becoming a great student of spiritual science, nor by accepting severe austerity
and penances performed for realization.”

Similarly, in the same Bhagwatam, Seventh Canto, Fifth Chapter, in connection with the conversation of Prahlad Maharaj with his father, Hiranyakasipu, the following statement appears: “When the atheist father Hiranyakasipu inquired from his son where he got such an attitude of devotional
service, the boy replied: “So long as one is not favored by the dust of the feet
of pure devotees, then he cannot even touch the path of devotional service,
which is the solution of all the varieties of problems of material life.”

Lord Chaitanya said to Sanatan Goswami that all the Scriptures stress
association with pure devotees of Godhead. The opportunity to associate
with a pure devotee of the Supreme Lord is the beginning of one’s complete
perfection. This statement is also confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam, First
Canto, Eighteenth Chapter. It is said there that the facility and benediction
achieved by the association of a pure devotee cannot be compared with
anything: neither elevation to the heavenly kingdom, nor liberation from this
material energy.

Lord Krishna, also, while giving instruction to Arjuna, in the Srimad
Bhagavad Gita, confirmed this as the most confidential instruction, in the
102 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Eighteenth Chapter, 65th verse. The Lord said there: “My dear Arjuna, you
are My affectionate friend and relative, and therefore, for your benefit, I am
giving you the most confidential knowledge: Just become always mindful
of Me, become always a devotee of Mine, become a constant worshipper of
Me, and just become a soul surrendered to Me. That is the only way by which
you can achieve My Abode. Because you are My very dear friend, My most
confidential knowledge is disclosed herewith to you.”

Such a direct instruction of Krishna to Arjuna is more important than any
Vedic injunctions or regulative service. There are certainly many Vedic
injunctions, such as ritualistic performances, sacrificial performances, regulative
duties, meditation, and the speculative process of knowledge; but Krishna’s
direct order—“You just give up everything and become My devotee, My
worshipper” —should be taken as the final order of the Lord, and one should
follow that principle.

If one is convinced by this direct order of the Lord in the Bhagavad Gita,
and becomes attached to His devotional service and gives up all other engagements, then he undoubtedly becomes successful. Srimad Bhagwatam also says,
to confirm this statement, that one should be engaged in other paths of selfrealization only so long as one is not convinced by the direct order of the
Lord, Sri Krishna. As stated in Srimad Bhagwatam and Bhagavad Gita, the direct
order of the Lord is to give up everything and be engaged in devotional
service.

This firm conviction is known as faith. Faith means that one is firmly
convinced that, simply by devotional service to Lord Krishna, everything
else is performed—including the regulative principles of ritualistic duties,
sacrifices, performance of Yoga, and the speculative pursuit of knowledge.
Everything else is performed if one is convinced that devotional service to the
Lord includes everything. This is also found in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Fourth
Canto, Thirty-first Chapter. It is said there: “As by watering the root of the
tree the branches, the twigs, the leaves, and the fruits become nourished; and
as in supplying foodstuffs to the stomach all the senses become satisfied—
similarly, simply by devotional service to Krishna, all other worship and all
other processes are completed.” Such a faithful and firmly convinced person
is eligible to be elevated as a pure devotee.

Now, amongst the devotees there are three classes, according to the degree
of conviction: The first class devotee is one who is conversant with all kinds
of Vedic literature, and at the same time has the firm conviction mentioned
above. He is a first class devotee, and he can deliver all others from the pangs
Service to the Lord 103

of material miseries. The second class devotee is firmly convinced and of strong
faith, but has no power to cite evidence from revealed Scriptures. The third
class devotee is one whose faith is not very strong but is eligible to be promoted
to the position of second class devotee or first class devotee by the gradual
cultivation of devotional service.

It is said in Srimad Bhagwatam, Eleventh Canto, Second Chapter, that the
first class devotee always sees the Supreme Lord as the Soul of all living entities.
Therefore, in seeing all living entities, he sees Krishna and nothing but Krishna.
A devotee who places his full faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who makes friendship with the pure devotees, who shows favor to the innocent person, and who avoids those who are atheistic or are against devotional
service—such a devotee is called a second class pure devotee. And a person
who is engaged in the devotional service of the Lord according to the direction of the Spiritual Master, or by family tradition, and worships the diety
of the Lord, but has not much cultivation of knowledge in devotional service,
and does not know who is a devotee and who is a non-devotee—such a person
is called a third class pure devotee. The last-mentioned are not actually pure
devotees. They are almost in the devotional line, but their position is not very
secure.

The purport is that, when a person shows his love for God and his friendship for the devotees and his mercy for the innocent and his reluctance to the
non-devotees, he becomes in the category of a pure devotee. Such a person,
by developing devotional service, can perceive that every living entity is
part and parcel of the Supreme. In each and every living entity he can see the
Supreme Person, and therefore he becomes highly developed in Krishna
Consciousness. At this stage he does not make any distinction as to who is
a devotee and who is a non-devotee. He sees everyone in the service of the
Lord. A pure devotee, however, continues to develop all great qualities in
his body, while engaged in Krishna Consciousness and devotional service.
It is stated in Srimad Bhagwatam, Fifth Canto, Chapter Eighteen, that anyone
who has attained pure unalloyed devotional service to the Supreme Lord
develops all the good qualities of the demigods; whereas a person who hasn't
developed pure devotional service to the Lord, in spite of his being materially
qualified, is sure to go astray as he hovers on the mental plane. Therefore,
his material qualification is valueless.
CHAPTER TWELVE

    

[7
NZS
“A

besa, ‘
—\* Hy nhs
— \ a
a 1 a
WN

The Devotee

A person in Krishna Consciousness, fully devoted in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord, develops many good qualities, or godly qualities—
pertaining to the demigods. There are many such qualities, but Lord Chaitanya
described only some of them to Sanatan Goswami: A devotee of the Lord
is always kind to everyone. He does not pick a quarrel with anyone. He takes
the essence of life, spiritual life. He is equal to everyone. Nobody can find
fault in a devotee. His magnanimous mind is always fresh and clean and
without any material obsessions. He is a benefactor to all living entities. He is
peaceful and always surrendered to Krishna. He has no material desire. He is
very humble and is fixed in his direction. He is victorious over the six material
qualities such as lust and anger. He does not eat more than what he needs.
He is always sane. He is respectful to others; but for himself he does not require
any respect. He is grave. He is merciful. He is friendly. He is a poet. He is an
expert. And he is silent.

In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Third Canto, Twenty-fifth Chapter, the person

104
The Devotee 105

in Krishna Consciousness, devoted to the loving service of the Lord, is also
described: Such a devotee or person in Krishna Consciousness 1s always tolerant
and merciful. He is a friend to all living entities. He has no enemies. He is
peaceful, and he is decorated with all good qualities. These are the symptoms
of the person in Krishna Consciousness.

It is also said in the Bhagwatam that if one gets the opportunity to serve
a great soul—a Mahatma—then his path to liberation is open. Those who are,
however, attached to persons in the materialistic conception of life are on the
path of darkness. Those who are actually holy are transcendentalists, equipoised,
very peaceful, without any anger, and friendly to all living entities. Therefore
becoming Krishna conscious, or a devotee of the Lord, is caused simply by
association with such holy men. And to develop love of Godhead, the association of holy devotees is also needed. For anyone who comes in contact with
a holy man, as mentioned above, the path of advancement in spiritual life is
now opening. And, by following that path, he is sure to develop Krishna
Consciousness in full devotional service.

In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Eleventh Canto, Second Chapter, Vasudeva,
the father of Krishna, asks Narada Muni about the welfare of life. In reply,
Narada Muni quotes a passage from the discussion of the nine sages with King
Nimi: “O holy sages, I am just trying to ask what the paths of well-being for
every living entity are. And, a moment of association with holy men is the
most valuable thing in life. That moment will open the path of advancement in spiritual life.” This is also confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Third
Canto, Twenty-fifth Chapter.

Association with holy persons and the discussion of transcendental subject
matters with them convinces one about the purposeful course. Very soon,
hearing of Krishna becomes pleasing to the ear, and satisfactory to one’s heart.
After reception of such messages from holy persons or pure devotees, if one
tries to apply them in his own life, then naturally the path of Krishna Consciousness becomes developed in faith, attachment, and devotional service—
one after another.

The Lord then informed Sanatan Goswami about the behavior of a devotee.
The sum and substance of such behavior enunciated by the Lord is that one
should always be aloof from unholy association. That is the sum and substance
of the behavior of a devotee. And what is unholy association? It is association
with one who is too attached to women, and one who is not a devotee of
Lord Krishna. These are unholy persons. The purport is that, as one is advised
to associate with holy devotees of the Lord, so one has to be careful to avoid
106 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

the association of unholy non-devotees of the Lord. Those who are pure
devotees of Krishna are very careful to keep aloof from these two kinds of
unholy non-devotees.

The result of unholy association with non-devotees is described in the
Srimad Bhagwatam, Third Canto, Thirty-first Chapter. It is said there that
one should simply give up association with a person who is a playmate for
women; because, in association with such an unholy person, one becomes
bereft of all good qualities, such as truthfulness, cleanliness, mercifulness,
gravity, intelligence, shyness, beauty, fame, forgiveness, control of the mind,
control of the senses, and all opulences that are automatically achieved by the
devotee. A man is never so degraded as when he is degraded by association
with persons who are too attached to women.

Regarding this matter of disassociation from unholy persons, Lord
Chaitanya quoted a verse from Katyayani Samhita: “One should rather tolerate
the miseries of being locked in a cage full of fire than tolerate the miseries of
associating with those who are not devotees of the Lord.” It is also advised
that one should not see the faces of persons who are irreligious, or without
any devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is recommended
by the Lord that one should scrupulously renounce the association of unwanted
persons, and completely take shelter of the Supreme Lord Krishna. The same
instruction is also given to Arjuna by Krishna in the last pages of Bhagavad
Gita: “You give up everything and just surrender unto Me, and I shall take
care of you, and protect you from all the reactions to sinful activities.”

The Lord is very kind to His devotees. He is very grateful. He is able and
magnanimous. Therefore, it is our duty to believe in the words of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. And if we are intelligent enough and educated
enough, we shall follow this principle without any hesitation. As said by
Aukrur in addressing Krishna, in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Eightyfourth Chapter: “Who can become a surrendered soul to any other than
Yourself? Who is so dear, Who is so truthful, Who is so friendly, and Who
is so grateful? You are so perfect and complete that even though You give
Yourself to Your devotee, still You are full and perfect. You can therefore
satisfy all the desires of the devotee, even to delivering Yourself to Your
devotee.”

A person who is intelligent and able to understand the philosophy of
Krishna Consciousness, therefore, naturally gives up everything and takes to
the shelter of Krishna only. In this connection, Lord Chaitanya recited a verse

spoken by Uddhava in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Third Canto, Second Chapter:
The Devotee 107

“How can one take shelter of anyone else but Krishna, Who is so kind? Even
though Bakasur’s sister planned to kill Him when He was an infant, by applying poison to her breast and offering it to Him to suck and thus to die—still
that heinous woman received salvation, and was elevated to the same post
as His own mother.” The verse refers to the time Putana planned to kill
Krishna when He was a child, by poisoning her breast and offering it to Him
to suck. Krishna accepted it and sucked the milk from the breast of that demoniac woman, and at the same time sucked out her life also. But the result
was that Putana was raised to the same post as His own mother.

There is no essential difference between a fully surrendered soul and a man
in the renounced order of life. The only difference is that a fully surrendered
soul has the distinguishing symptom of being completely dependent upon
Krishna. This surrendering process can be characterized by six different qualities: The first quality is that one should accept everything that is favorable
to the discharge of Krishna duties or devotional service. One should be determined to accept the process. The second is that he should give up everything
which is unfavorable to the discharge of devotional service; and one should
be so determined to give it all up. Thirdly, one should be convinced that
nobody else can protect him except Krishna, and therefore he has full faith
that he will be protected by the Lord. It should be mentioned here that the
impersonalists think that being One with Krishna, or One with the Supreme
Lord, is their actual identity. A devotee, however, does not destroy his identity,
but he lives with full faith that Krishna will kindly protect him in every
respect.

Fourthly, a devotee should always accept Krishna as his Maintainer. Fruitive performers generally expect protection from demigods; but a devotee
does not expect any protection from any demigod. He is fully convinced that
Krishna will protect him from all kinds of unfavorable conditions. Fifth, a
devotee is always conscious that his desires are not independent. Unless Krishna
fulfills them, his desires cannot be fulfilled. Lastly, one should always think
of himself as the most fallen, so that Krishna may take care of him.

Such a surrendered soul should take shelter in a holy place like Vrindaban,
Mathura, Dwarka, Mayapur, and should surrender himself to the Lord, saying,
“My Lord, from today I am Yours. You can protect me or kill me as You
like.” The devotee takes shelter of Krishna in such a way. Krishna is grateful
and accepts him and gives him all kinds of protection. This is confirmed in
the Srimad Bhagwatam, Eleventh Canto, Twenty-ninth Chapter. It is said
there that if a person who is about to die takes full shelter of the Supreme
108 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Personality of Godhead and offers himself fully under His care, he actually
attains immortality at that time, and is eligible to become in association with
the Supreme Lord, and to enjoy transcendental bliss.

The Lord then explained to Sanatan Goswami about the various types and
symptoms of practical devotional service. When devotional service becomes
practical—to be performed with our present senses—at that time it is called
practical devotional service. Actually, devotional service is the eternal life of
the living entity, and is lying dormant in everyone's heart. The practice which
invokes that dormant devotional service is called practical devotional service.
The purport is that a living entity is constitutionally part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord. The Lord is compared to the Sun, and the living entities are
compared to the molecules of sunshine. Under the spell of illusory energy,
that spiritual spark is almost extinct. But, by practical devotional service, one
is again revived to his natural constitutional position. When one is practicing
such devotional service, it means that he is going back to his original normal
position of liberation. Such devotional service can be practiced with one’s
senses, under the direction of a bona fide Spiritual Master.

The beginning of such spiritual activities for making advancement in
Krishna Consciousness, or devotional service, is to hear. Hearing is the most
important subject matter for advancement in Krishna Consciousness. One
should be very eager to hear favorably about Krishna. One should give up
speculative knowledge or fruitive activities, and simply worship and desire
to achieve love of Godhead. That love of Godhead is eternally existent within
oneself. One has to simply practice the process of hearing. Hearing and chanting are the principal processes of devotional service.

Such devotional service may be regulative or affectionate. One who has
not developed transcendental affection for Krishna should conduct his life
under the direction of Scriptural injunction, and the guidance of the Spiritual
Master. In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Second Canto, First Chapter, Sukadeva
Goswami advises Maharaj Parikshit as follows:

“O best amongst the Bharatas, it is the prime duty of persons who want
to become fearless to hear about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari,
and to chant about Him, and always remember Him. Lord Vishnu is always
to be remembered, and not to be forgotten for even a moment. He is the sum
and substance of all regulative principles.”

The purport is that there are so many rules and regulations in the revealed
Scriptures: so many recommended activities, and so many prohibited activities—but when all of them are taken together, it appears that remembrance
The Devotee 109

of the Supreme Lord is always the essence of everything. Remembrance of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead always within one’s heart is the practical
action of devotional service. In that performance of devotional service there
is no regulative principle. There are no do’s and don’t’s.

Generally, in devotional service, one should accept the following principles: 1. One is to take shelter of a bona fide spiritual master. 2. It is necessary
to be initiated by the spiritual master; 3. to serve the spiritual master; 4. to
inquire and to learn love from the Spiritual Master; 5. to follow in the footsteps of holy persons devoted to the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
6. For the satisfaction of Krishna one should be prepared to give up all kinds
of enjoyment and miseries. 7. One should live in a place where Krishna had
His Pastimes. 8. One should be satisfied with whatever is sent by Krishna for
maintenance of his body and should not be anxious to receive more than
that. 9. One should observe fasting on Ekadasee day, the eleventh day after
the full moon and the eleventh day after the new moon, when no grains,
cereals or beans are eaten. Simple vegetables and milk are taken in moderate
amounts, and chanting of Hare Krishna, reading Scripture, etc. is increased.
10. One should show respect to devotees, the cow and trees such as the banyan
tree. )

These ten items are essential for a neophyte devotee who is beginning
to follow the path of devotional service. The next stage is as follows: 11.
One should try to avoid offenses in the service to the Lord, and in chanting
the Holy Names of the Lord. There are ten kinds of offenses in chanting the
Holy Name and they should be avoided. The offenses are: 1. Blaspheming
a devotee of the Lord; 2. Considering the Lord and the demigods on the same
level, or to think that there are many Gods; 3. To neglect the orders of the
spiritual master; 4. To minimize the authority of Scriptures (the Vedas);
5. To interpret the Holy Names of God; 6. To commit sin on the strength
of chanting; 7. To instruct the Glories of the Lord’s Name to the unfaithful;
8. To compare the Holy Name with material piety; 9. To be inattentive while
chanting the Holy Name; 10. To remain attached to material things in spite
of chanting the Holy Names. 12. One should avoid the association of unholy
non-devotees. 13. One should not attempt to have many disciples. 14. One
should not take the trouble of understanding various books or to understand
partially any particular book, and one should avoid discussing different doctrines. 15. One should be equipoised both in gain and loss. 16. One should not
be subject to any kind of lamentation. 17. One should not disrespect demigods,
or other Scriptures. 18. One should not tolerate blaspheming the Supreme
110 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Lord and His devotees. 19. One should avoid ordinary topics of novels and
fiction, but there is no injunction that one should avoid hearing ordinary
news. 20. One should not give any trouble to any living creature, including
a small bug.

The first ten items are affirmative, and the second ten are prohibitive.
In the Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu complied by Sri Rupa Goswami, it is said that
one should be very liberal in behavior and should avoid any undesirable
behavior. Out of the twenty regulations mentioned above, the most important
are to accept the shelter of a bona fide Spiritual Master, to be initiated by him,
and to serve him.

The process of devotional service can be analyzed as follows: 1. Hearing,
2. Chanting, 3. Remembering, 4. Worshipping, 5. Praying, 6. Serving, 7.
Engaging as a servitor, 8. Being friendly, 9. Offering everything, 10. Dancing
before the deity, 11. Singing, 12. Informing, 13. Offering obeisances, 14.
Standing up to show respect to the devotees, 15. When a devotee goes, following him up to the door, 16. Entering into the temple of the Lord, 17.
Circumambulating the temple, 18. Reading prayers, 19. Vibrating hymns,
20. Performing Samkirtan, or congregational chanting, 21. Smelling the incense
and the flowers offered to the deity, 22. Accepting the Prasadam (food offered
to Krishna), 23. Seeing Aritrik or ceremonial performance of receiving the
Lord, 24. Seeing the deity, 25. Offering to the Lord His own palatable foodstuff, 26. Meditating, 27. Offering water to the tulsi tree, 28. Offering respect
to the Vaishnavas, or advanced devotees, 29. Living in Mathura or Vrindaban,
30. Understanding Srimad Bhagwatam, 31. Trying for Krishna to one’s utmost,
32. Expecting the mercy of Krishna, 33. Performing the ceremonial functions
of Krishna with devotees, 34. Surrendering in all respects, 35. Observing
different ceremonial functions.

To these thirty-five items another four are to be added: 1. Marking the
body with sandalwood pulp to show that he is a Vaishnava, 2. Painting the
body with the Holy Names of the Lord, 3. Covering the body with the remnants of the cover of the deity, 4. Accepting Charanamrita, or the water washed
of the Lord. Adding these four items to the above thirty-five, we have thirtynine items for devotional service. Out of them, 1. To associate with devotees,
2. To chant the Holy Name of the Lord, 3. To hear Srimad Bhagwatam, 4.
To live in a holy place such as Mathura or Vrindaban, 5. With great devotion,
to serve the deity—these five items are very important. They are especially

mentioned by Rupa Goswami in his book Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu.
The thirty-nine items above, added with these five items, become fortyThe Devotee III

four. Add to that 20 preliminary occupations, and the total is sixty-four
different items for conducting devotional service. One can adopt these sixtyfour items by his body, mind and senses, so that gradually his devotional
service becomes pure. Some of the items are completely separate, and some
are identical, and others appear to be mixed.

Srila Rupa Goswami has recommended that one should live in association
of those of the same mentality. Therefore, it is necessary to form some association of Krishna Consciousness and live together for the cultivation of
Krishna knowledge and devotional service. The most important item for
living in that association is to understand Srimad Bhagavad Gita and Srimad
Bhagwatam mutually. When faith and devotion are developed, they become
transformed into the worship of the deity and chanting of the Holy Name,
and living in a place like Mathura and Vrindaban.

These five items, mentioned after the thirty-nine, are very important and
essential. If one can simply discharge the last mentioned five items, even if
they are not done sufficiently, one can be elevated to the highest perfectional
stage. One may be able to perform one item or many items, according to
one’s capacity, but the principle factor of one’s complete attachment to devotional service makes him advance on the path. There are many devotees in
history who attained the perfection of devotional service simply by discharging
the duties in one item. And there are many other devotees, like Maharaj
Amburish, who executed all the different items.

Some individual devotees who attained perfection in devotional service
by executing only one item are: Maharaj Parikshit, who was liberated in full
perfection simply by hearing. Sukadeva Goswami who became liberated and
perfect in devotional service simply by chanting. Lakshmi, simply by serving
the Lotus Feet of the Lord. King Prithu attained perfection simply by worshipping; Akrura simply by praying; Hanuman only by becoming the servant
of Lord Rama. Arjuna attained perfection simply by becoming a friend to
Krishna, and Bali Maharaj simply by offering whatever he had in his possession.

So far as Maharaj Amburish is concerned, he practically performed all
the items of devotional service: he first of all engaged his mind on the Lotus
Feet of Krishna. He engaged his words, his power of speaking, in describing
the transcendental qualities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He engaged
his hands in washing the temple of the deity, his ears in hearing the words
of Krishna, and he engaged his eyes in beholding the deity of Krishna. He
engaged his touch for rendering service to the devotees, and he engaged his
I12 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

sense of smell to accept the fragrance of the flowers offered to Krishna. He
engaged his tongue in tasting the tulsi leaves offered to the Lotus Feet of
Krishna, his legs in going into the temple of Krishna, and he engaged his head
in offering obeisances unto the deity of Krishna. All his desires and ambitions
were engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. Therefore, he is the leader
in discharging all kinds of devotional service in different ways.

Anyone who engages in the devotional service of the Lord in full Krishna
Consciousness becomes freed of all debts to the sages and demigods and forefathers, to whom we are generally indebted. In the Srimad Bhagwatam this
is confirmed: “Anyone who fully engages himself in the service of the Lord,
without discharging any other duty, O King, is no longer indebted or servant
to the demigods, to the sages, to other living entities, to his relatives, to any
man, or to the forefathers.” The purport is that every man, just after his birth,
becomes at once indebted to all the above personalities, and one is expected
to discharge many kinds of ritualistic functions because of this indebtedness.
But for a person who is fully surrendered unto Krishna, there is no obligation.
In spite of not discharging such obligations, he is free from all debt to such
persons.

It should be carefully noted, however, that when a person gives up all
other duties and simply takes to the transcendental service of Krishna, he has
no desire, and he is not subjected to, or apt to be performing, sinful activities.
If, however, he performs any sinful activities—not wilfully, but by chance—
then Krishna gives him all protection. He does not require to purify himself
by any other method. This is confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Eleventh
Canto, Fifth Chapter: “A devotee who is fully engaged in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord is protected by the Supreme Person. But in case such
a devotee unintentionally commits some sinful activity, or may be obliged
to act in some sinful activity under certain circumstances, God gives him all
protection, being situated within his heart.”

The processes of speculative knowledge and renunciation are not practically
the chief items for acquiring a higher standard of devotional service. One
doesnot have to take to the principles of nonviolence and sense control, although
there are rules and regulations for acquiring these qualities in other processes.
Without being engaged in the practice of such processes, a devotee develops
such high qualities simply by discharging devotional service to the Lord.
In Srimad Bhagwatam, Eleventh Canto, the Lord says that for those who are
actually engaged in the devotional service of the Lord there is no necessity
for cultivating speculative knowledge or renunciation.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN

 

Devotional Service in Attachment

Out of sheer misunderstanding some transcendentalists think that knowledge and renunciation are some of the items necessary for rising to the standard
of devotional service. This is not so. The cultivation of knowledge and the
renunciation of fruitive activities may be necessary to understand one’s spiritual
existence in relation to the material conception of life, but they afe not part
and parcel of the devotional service. The results of knowledge and fruitive
activities are liberation and material sense gratification, respectively. Therefore, they cannot be part and parcel of devotional service. Rather, they have
no intrinsic value in the discharge of devotional service. When one is freed
from the resultant action of knowledge and fruitive activities, then one can
be situated in devotional service. A devotee of Lord Krishna is by nature
nonviolent and self-controlled, both in the mind and the senses. Therefore, he
does not have to try separately to acquire the qualifications which result from
cultivating knowledge and from fruitive activities.

When Sri Uddhava was asking Krishna about the rules and regulations,

113
14 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

and the subjects of restriction as they are stated in the Vedic language, he
asked, “Why is it that from the Vedic hymns one is enlivened in the matter
of material enjoyment, while, from the instruction of Vedas, one also is freed
from all illusion and is encouraged to have liberation?” The rules are supposed
to be ordained by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but apparently there
are contradictions, and so Uddhava inquired about how to be free from these
contradictory statements of the Vedas.

In reply to this, Lord Krishna informed him about the superexcellence of
devotional service: “For persons who are already engaged in devotional service to Me, and who are fixed in their minds about Me, endeavoring for the
cultivation of knowledge and renunciation are not practical or necessary.”

The purport is that devotional service is by itself independent of any other
process. The processes of cultivating knowledge and renunciation, or meditation, may be a little helpful in the beginning, but they cannot be considered
paraphernalia for discharging devotional service. In other words, devotional
service can be discharged independently of the cultivation of knowledge and
renunciation. In this connection, there is a verse from Skanda Purana, in which
Parbut Muni said to a hunter tribesman: “O hunter, the qualifications which
you have now acquired, such as nonviolence and others, are not astonishing,
because one who is engaged in devotional service to the Supreme Lord cannot
be the source of any trouble for anyone under any circumstances.”

The Lord next said to Sanatan Goswami: “So far I have explained devotional service under regulative principles. Now I shall explain devotional
service to you in terms of transcendental attachment.”

The inhabitants of Vrindaban, Vrajabhumi, are practical living examples
of devotional service. Theirs is ideal devotional service with attachment.
Such devotion cannot be found anywhere else except in Vrajabhumi, Vrindaban. If one develops devotional service and attachment by following in the
footsteps of the inhabitants of Vrajabhumi, that is called Raga Marga Bhakti,
or devotional service in pursuance of attachment for the Lord. There is a
statement in the Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu about this: “Devotional service with
ecstatic attachment for that service, which becomes a natural factor for the
devotee, is called Raga, or transcendental attachment.” The devotional service
discharged in that standard of Raga is called Ragatmika, devotion. Deep
attachment and complete absorption in the object of love is called Raga atmika,
devotion. Examples can be seen in the activities of the residents of Vrajabhumi,
and one who becomes attracted to Krishna by hearing of such attachment
is certainly very fortunate. When he becomes deeply affected by such devoDevotional Service in Attachment 115

tional service as that of the residents of Vrajabhumi, and tries to follow in
their footsteps, he does not care for the restrictions or regulations of the revealed Scriptures. That is the characteristic of discharging Raga Bhakti.

Devotional service with attachment is a natural inclination. One who has
been attracted by such a natural inclination does not accept any argument
against his conviction, even though such arguments are presented according
to Scriptural injunction. This natural inclination is also based on
injunction, and so a person who has attachment for that particular type of
devotional service toward the Supreme Lord is not required to change it
simply on the strength of Scriptural argument. In this connection we should
note that the class of so-called devotees known as Prakrita-sahajia follow their
own concocted ideas and represent themselves as Krishna and Radha, and
indulge in debauchery. This kind of devotional service and attachment is
false. They are actually gliding down the hellish path. This is not the standard
of Ragatmika, or devotion. This Prakrita sahajia community is actually cheated
and very unfortunate.

Devotional service with attachment can be executed in two ways: externally and internally. Externally, the devotee strictly follows the regulative
principles, beginning with chanting and hearing and other regulations, while
internally he always thinks of the attachment which attracts him to serve the
Supreme Lord. He always thinks of his special devotional service and attachment. Such a real devotee’s attachment does not violate the regulative principles of devotional service, but he adheres to them strictly; and yet, within
his mind, he always thinks of his particular attachment.

All the inhabitants of Vrajabhumi, Vrindaban, are very dear to Krishna.
A devotee in attachment selects one of the inhabitants and follows in his
footsteps in order to be successful in his own devotional service. A pure devotee
in attachment always follows such a personality of Vrajabhumi within himself. It is advised in Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu that a pure devotee in devotional
service with attachment, should always remember the activities of a particular
inhabitant of Vraja, even though he is not able to live directly in Vrajabhumi
or Vrindaban. Thus he may always think of Vrajabhumi and Vrindaban.

Such confidential devotees in attachment are divided into several categories:
some of them are servants, some of them are friends, some of them are parents
and some of them are conjugal lovers. In devotional service with attachment
one has to follow a particular type of devotee of Vrajabhumi.

In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Third Canto, Twenty-fifth Chapter, it is stated:
“The word Matpara is used only for persons who are satisfied with the idea
116 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

of becoming an adherent of Me alone. They consider that I am their Soul,
I am their Freind, I am their Son, I am their Master, I am their Well-wisher,
I am their God, and I am their Supreme Goal. My dear Mother, there is no
action of time upon such devotees.” In the Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu, the author
offers his respectful obeisances to such persons who always think of Krishna
as He is, as when He is Son, Well-wisher, Brother, Father, Friend, or any such
relationship. Anyone following the principles of devotional service with
attachment, and in terms of a particular devotee in Vrajabhumi certainly
achieves the highest perfectional love of Godhead in that spirit.

There are two developmental characteristics for such seeds of love of
Godhead. They are known as Rati, or attachment, and Bhava, the condition
immediately preceding love of Godhead. By these two characteristics the
Supreme Lord Sri Krishna is conquered by such devotees. These two characteristics are there before any symptoms of love of Godhead. This was explained
by Lord Chaitanya to Sanatan Goswami. Lord Chaitanya said that there is
really no end to describing the system of devotional service with attachment,
and He is simply trying to offer a sampling of such devotional service.

Lord Chaitanya then said to Sanatan Goswami that He would describe
the ultimate goal of devotional service, that which is meant for such a person
who wants to attain perfection. When one’s attachment for Krishna becomes
very deep, this condition is called love of Godhead. Such a state of being is
called the permanent situation of the devotee. Kaviraj Goswami has offered
in this connection his respectful obeisances unto Lord Chaitanya for His
sublime teachings of love of Godhead. It is stated in the Chaitanya Charitamrita:
“O You Supreme Personality of Godhead, whoever awarded such pure devotional service to anyone else? O most magnanimous Incarnation of the Personality of Godhead, for my part I offer my respectful obeisances to this
Incarnation, known as Gaura Krishna.”

In the Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu the state of being in love of Godhead is
compared to the sunshine emanating from the Sun of love for Godhead;
and this shining makes the devotee’s heart more and more lovely. The heart
of such a devotee is situated in a transcendental position, beyond the modes
of goodness of material Nature. And the process of making the heart further
and further sterilized by the sunshine of love is called Bhava. This description
of Bhava is given by Rupa Goswami. Bhava is called the permanent characteristic; and the crucial point of progress for Bhava is called the marginal state
of love of Godhead. When the Bhava state becomes deeper and deeper, the
learned devotees call that state of being love of Godhead. In the Narada PanDevotional Service in Attachment t17

charatra there is a verse in which it is stated: “When one is firmly convinced
that Vishnu is the only Object of love and worship, and there is no one else
and no demigod for his devotional service, it is accepted that he is feeling
intimacy in love of Godhead, as is approved by such personalities as Bhisma,
Prahlad, Uddhava and Narada.” ,

If someone, on account of some righteous activities which provoke devotional service, is influenced by such an attitude of service, and takes shelter of
the good association of the pure devotees, then he develops an attachment for
chanting and hearing. In such a state of mind the development of chanting
and hearing makes him advance further and further in the matter of regulative
devotional service to the Supreme Lord. And, as he advances in the regulative
service of the Supreme Lord, so, proportionately, his misgivings for the
material world diminish. Beginning with faith, and advancing in the process
of hearing and chanting, the devotee becomes more and more firmly fixed
in that faith. That faith gradually develops into taste, and that taste gradually
develops into attachment. When the attachment becomes purer, then it is
exhibited in two characteristics, which are called Bhava and Rati. When this
principle of Rati becomes deeper, it is called love of Godhead. Love of Godhead is the ultimate goal of human life.

This process is summarized in the Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu by Rupa Goswami: “The first thing required is faith, and from faith one associates with
pure devotees, and, by such association, one develops devotional service.
And when he develops devotional service, his misgivings are diminished.
Then he is situated in firm conviction, and from that conviction he develops
a taste and advances up to the attachment stage of life, known as the regulated
principles of devotional service. And, after that stage, when he still further
makes progress, it is called Bhava, or a permanent situation. Such love of God
can go further and deeper and deeper, and then is called the highest stage of
love of Godhead.”

In Sanskrit, this highest stage is called Prema. The word Prema can be
explained as love of God without any exchange or return. Actually, the words
Prema and love are not synonymous, but still one can say that Prema is the
highest stage of love. One who has attained this stage of Prema is the most
perfect human being. Srimad Bhagwatam also confirms this statement in the
Third Canto, Twenty-fifth Chapter: Only by the association of pure devotees
can one develop a taste for Krishna Consciousness; and when he tries to apply
such developed Krishna Consciousness in his life, one can achieve all other
things up to the stages of Bhava and Prema.
118 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Lord Chaitanya next described the symptoms of a person who has developed from faith to the stage of Bhava. He is characterized as follows: he is
never agitated even if there are causes for agitation. The next characteristic
is that he does not waste his time for a moment. He is always anxious to do
something for Krishna Consciousness. Even if he has no engagement, he'll
find some work to do for Krishna’s satisfaction. The next characteristic is that
he does not like anything which is not connected with Krishna. He never
hankers after personal respect. Although he is in the best position, still he does
not hanker after being honored by others. And he is confident in his task.
He is never under the impression that he is not making progress or achieving
the Supreme goal of life or going back to Godhead, going back to Home.
He is fully convinced that he is making progress toward that site. As such,
with more and more confidence, he is always very busy to achieve that highest
goal of life. He is very much attached to the gratification of the Lord, or chanting, or hearing about the Lord. At all times he is always attached to describing
the transcendental qualities of the Lord. He wants to live in such places as
Mathura, Vrindaban, or Dwarka. These symptoms are all visible in a person
who has developed to the stage of Bhava.

This state of Bhava is described in connection with King Parikshit, when
he was sitting on the bank of the Ganges to meet his death because of being
cursed by a Brahmin boy. He spoke as follows: “All the Brahmins present
here, as well as Mother Ganges, may know that I am a soul completely surrendered to Krishna. I do not mind even if I am immediately bitten by the
snake sent by the Brahmin boy. Let the snake bite me as it likes, but I shall
be pleased if all of you present here go on chanting the message of Krishna.”
Such a devotee is always anxious to see that his time is not wasted in anything
which is not connected with Krishna. As such, desires derived from fruitive
activities, or from yogic meditation, or by the cultivation of knowledge are
not liked by him. He is simply attached to favorable words in relation with
Krishna. Such pure devotees of the Lord always go on praying to the Supreme
Lord with tears in their eyes, and their minds are always engaged in recollecting
the activities of the Lord, and with their bodies they offer obeisances. Thus
they are satisfied. Any devotee who is acting in such devotional service dedicates his life and body for that purpose.

King Bharata was also a pure devotee, and under his name India is called
Bharatvarsa. He left his household life and kingdom at an early age. He left
his devoted, beautiful wife, his son and friends and kingdom and everything
just as if they were stool. Such are the symptoms of persons who have developed Bhava in their devotional service. Such a person in devotional service
Devotional Service in Attachment 119

always thinks of himself as the most wretched, and he is only satisfied that
someday or other Krishna will be kind enough to favor him by engaging him
in devotional service. In the Padma Purana another instance of the pure devotee
is found, where the king, although the best of all human beings, was begging
from door to door and was even praying to the lowest of human society,
the Chandala.

Sri Sanatan Goswami later composed the following verse: “I am low in
love of Godhead, and I haven't any asset for hearing about devotional service.
Neither do I have any understanding of the science of devotional service,
nor do I have any cultivation of knowledge, nor any righteous activities behind me; nor am I born of high family. But, O Darling of the damsels of Braja,
still I maintain a hope for achieving You, and that hope is disturbing me.”
So a devotee, being touched deeply by such strong desire, always chants
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare
Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

In this connection a nice verse by Bilvamongal appears in Krishna Karnamrita: “O Player of the nice flute, Krishna, the beauty of Your boyhood
activities is very wonderful in this world. You know the agitation of my mind,
and I know what You are. Nobody knows how confidential our relationship
is. Now my eyes are anxious to see You and Your face, but I cannot see You.
Please—let me know what I shall do.” A similar passage appears in Bhakti
Rasamrita Sindhu, by Rupa Goswami, which states: “O Govinda! this young
girl with tears in her eyes is crying in a sweet voice, chanting Your Glories.”
Such pure devotees are always anxious to describe the Glories of Krishna, and
to live in a place where Krishna exhibited His Pastimes.

A similar verse appears again in Krishna Karnamrita: “This Body of
Krishna is so nice, His Face is so nice—everything about Him is only sweet
and fragrant.” A similar passage also appears in the Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu:
“O Lotus-eyed One, when shall I be able to always chant Your Holy Name,
and being agitated in that,chanting, when shall I be able to dance on the bank
of the Yamuna?”

All the above descriptions made by Lord Chaitanya to Sanatan Goswami
are called symptoms of the Bhava stage of devotional service. Next He proceeds
to describe the symptoms of actual love for Krishna. He says that nobody
can understand a person who has developed love of Krishna—neither his words,
his activities, nor his symptoms. Even if one is very learned, it is very difficult
for him to understand a pure devotee in love of Godhead. This is confirmed
in Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu also.

A person engaged in devotional service becomes slackened in his heart
136 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

when singing the glorification of the Supreme Lord. Because the Lord is very
dear to him, in glorifying the Lord’s Name, Fame, etc., he becomes almost
like an insane man, and in such a condition of life sometimes he laughs, sometimes he cries, sometimes he dances—and without any consideration of the
situation, he continues in such activities. And, by gradual development of his
love of Godhead he increases his affection, his emotion, his ecstasy. Such
attachment, Mahabhava, is the highest stage of devotional love. It can be
found like molasses or sugar, which are different stages of the same thing.
But the highest stage is called sugar candy. In different stages of the same
juice, sugar candy becomes more and more palatable. Similarly, in love of
Godhead, by a gradual process of development, transcendental pleasure is
increased to the highest stage for the real devotee.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN

   
  

SS =

=U AS

SS Wie
= aii am
| i
=\Ki =
“fo i NS

=
,

The Ecstacy of the Lord and

His Devotees

The symptoms of highly developed devotional service exhibited by the
pure devotees sometimes are imitated by persons who are not actually pure
devotees of Krishna. This is described in the Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu. Such
symptoms without devotional service to Krishna are purposeful, they are not
actual. Sometimes those who are not conversant with this science of devotional
service are captivated by the exhibition of such symptoms, but those who
are in knowledge of the science of devotional service do not accept such
symptoms. They are simply imitation, or only the beginning. That is accepted
by the learned devotees.

According to the different divisions and grades of devotees, the permanent
situations of the devotional attitude are divided into five categories: 1. peacefulness, 2. servitude toward Krishna, 3. friendship with Krishna, 4. parental
affection toward Krishna, and 5. conjugal love for Krishna. There is a different
taste and relish in each of the different divisions of love of Godhead, and a
devotee situated in a particular type of devotional service is happy in that

I21
122 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

position. The characteristic symptoms of a pure devotee are laughing and
crying; when emotions are favorable, they laugh; and when the emotion is
not favorable, they cry.

But above these two emotions there is the permanent situation of love
which is called Sthaaibhava. In other words, the attachment to Krishna is
called a permanent situation. That permanent loving attitude is sometimes
mixed with different kinds of tastes, and they are named Bibhava, Anubhava,
Byabhichary. Bibhava is a particular taste for attachment to Krishna, and is
divided into two further categories, namely Alambana and Uddipana. The
cause that increases one’s love of Krishna is said to be Bibhava, in the Agni
Purana and other authoritative Scriptures. Such taste is increased as Alambana,
when Krishna is the Objective. When Krishna’s transcendental qualities include a devotional emotion, by His Activities, His beautiful smiling Face and
flavor of Body, the sound of His flute, His sound of the Nopur, or conch shell,
the marks of His sole, His dwelling place, His paraphernalia of devotional
service: such as tulsi leaves, devotees, and the performance of ceremonies, and
Ekadasee—this devotional emotion so induced is called Alambana, or Uddipana.
When feeling and emotions within oneself are exhibited, that is called
Anubhava. In the Anubhava attitude, one dances and sometimes falls down,
sometimes sings loudly, sometimes shows convulsions, sometimes yearns,
sometimes breathes very heavily—all without any concern for the situation.

Those external features exhibited on the body of the devotees are called
Udbhasvar. The Byabhichary symptoms are thirty-three in number. Such
symptoms principally comprise the matter of words and different features
of the body. These different features of the body, such as dancing and trembling
and laughing, etc., when mixed with the Byabhichary symptoms are called
Samchary. And, when Bhava, Anubhava and Byabhichary symptoms are mixed
together they make the devotee dive into the ocean of immortality. That is
called the Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu, The Ocean of the Pure Nectar of Devotional Service; and one who is merged into that ocean is always concentratedly
in transcendental pleasure on the waves and sound of that particular ocean.

The particular flavors, or tastes of the devotees who merge into that ocean
of Bhakti Rasamrita are known as neutrality, servitude, friendship, parenthood
and conjugal love. The conjugal love taste, however, with symptoms of
decorating the body for attracting Krishna, is very prominent. The flavor of
servitude increases up to affection, anger, fraternity and attachment. The relish
of friendship increases up to affection, anger, fraternity, attachment and devotion. In the relish of parenthood, the attachment increases up to affection,
r i pi) A
- of o iy i hu Wl
FEA magi d
a (fi Zt hea
1 asa A

ai Ri si
idl 9 l MARI

 

Lord Chaitanya Fainting in the Temple of Lord Jagannath
 

 
The Ecstacy of the Lord and His Devotees 123

anger, fraternity and devotion. There are special flavors of friendship with
the Supreme Lord, as manifested in friends such as Subal. There the devotion
increases up to Bhava.

The different flavors are also divided into two kinds of ecstasy, called
Yoga and Biyoga, or meeting and separation. In the relish of friendship and
parenthood, the feelings of meeting and separation are various.

The situations known as Rudha and Adhirudha are possible in the flavor
or conjugal love. Conjugal love, as exhibited by the queens at Dwarka, is
called Rudha, and the conjugal love exhibited at Vrindaban by the damsels
of Vraja is called Adhirudha. The highest perfections of Adhirudha affection
in conjugal love can be divided into two: when they are actually getting
together it is called Madana, and when they are separated it is called Mohana.
In the ecstasy of Madana there are symptoms of kissing one another, and in
the ecstasy of Mohana there are two kinds of symptoms: Udghurna and Chitrajalpa. There are altogether ten divisions in the Chitrajalpa platform. In the
Srimad Bhagwatam there is a portion known as Bhramorgita, and different kinds
of Chitrajalpa are mentioned there. Udghurna is a symptom of separation,
and there is also the symptom called transcendental insanity. In that transcendental insanity one thinks that he himself has become the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In such an ecstasy he imitates the symptoms of Krishna
in different ways.

There are two kinds of dresses in conjugal love. They are called Sambhoga
and Bipralambha. On the Sambhoga platform the dresses are unlimited, and
on the Bipralambha platform they are four in number.

The ecstasy exhibited before the meeting of the love and the beloved,
and the ecstasy between them after meeting, and the state of mind of not
meeting the beloved is called Bipralambha, and that Bipralambha or previous
state of love is a nourishing element for meeting afterwards. When the lover
and beloved meet all of a sudden and embrace one another, feeling an ecstasy
of happiness, that state of mind is called Sambhoga. Sambhoga ecstasy is also
known, in different situations, by four names: 1. Samksipta, 2. Samkirna,
3. Sampanna, 4. Samriddhiman. Such symptoms are also visible during dreams.

The state of being before actually meeting one another is called Purvaraga.
The obstacles to the meeting of the lover and the beloved are called mana,
or anger. When the lover and beloved are separated in different places, that
sense is called Pravas. And the feelings of separation which are present even
during the meeting, under certain conditions, are called love anxieties. This
anxiety of love is exhibited in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Ninetieth
124 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Chapter, when the princesses were keeping awake nights watching Krishna
sleeping. They were afraid of Krishna’s separation, and were talking amongst
themselves of how they had been affected by the beautiful Eyes and Smiling
of Krishna.

The Supreme Lover is Krishn# and He is situated in Vrindaban. The
Supreme Beloved is Radharani. As Krishna is the Supreme Lover, there are
64 important qualifications of Krishna, on hearing which, the devotee takes
transcendental pleasure. The characteristics of Krishna are explained in the
Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu as follows: 1. His body is well-constructed. 2. It is
full of auspicious symptoms; 3. beautiful; 4. very glorious; 5. strong; 6.
always looking like a boy of sixteen; 7. well-versed in different languages; 8.
truthful; 9. decorated with pleasing words; 10. expert in speaking; I1. very
learned; 12. intelligent; 13. influential; 14. joyful; 15. cunning; 16. expert;
17. grateful; 18. firmly convinced. 19. He knows how to deal with different
circumstances; 20. is always conversant with Scriptural injunctions; 21. clean;
22. controlled by devotees; 23. steady; 24. self-controlled; 25. forgiving; 26.
grave; 27. speculative; 28. fairdealing; 29. magnanimous; 30. religious; 31. a
great hero; 32. merciful; 33. respectful; 34. competent; 35. gentle; 36. modest;
37. Protector of the surrendered soul; 38. Deliverer; 39. Friend of the devotees;
40. submissive to love; 41. all auspicious; 42. most Powerful; 43. famous;
44. devoted to all living entities; 45. worshipable by everyone; 48. full with
opulence; 49. Supreme; 50. full with riches.

All the above-mentioned 50 qualities are fragmentally present in every
living entity. When they are completely spiritually free and situated in their
original condition, all the above-mentioned 50 qualities can be perceived in
human life—but in minute quantity. There are five other transcendental
qualities, as mentioned below, which can be seen in Vishnu, the Supreme
Lord, and partially in Lord Shiva also—but they are not visible in the living
entities. They are as follows: 1. always situated in His original condition;
2. omniscient; 3. evergreen or always fresh; 4. eternally blissful; 5. conversant,
the master of all perfection.

Besides the above-mentioned five transcendental qualities, there are five
other qualities which can be seen in the Spiritual Sky, especially in the Vaikuntha planets where Narayana is the predominating deity. They are: 1.
inconceivable potencies; 2. able to sustain innumerable Universes; 3. the Seed
of all incarnations; 4. to give the highest perfection to enemies who are killed
by Narayana; and 5. the most attractive of the self-realized persons. The
above-mentioned 60 qualities are visible up to Narayana. And Krishna has
The Ecstacy of the Lord and His Devotees 12§

four other special qualities which are: 1. able to manifest wonderful Pastimes,
2. His transcendental flute-playing; 3. eternal youth; 4. His Personal Beauty.

As Krishna has 64 transcendental qualities, described above, so Srimati
Radharani has 25 transcendental qualities by creation, material and spiritual.
But Radharani can control even Krislita by Her transcendental qualities.
Such transcendental qualities are described as follows: 1. She is sweetness
personified. 2. She is a fresh young girl. 3. Her eyes are always moving. 4.
She is always brightly smiling. 5. She has all the signs of fortunate lines in Her
body. 6. By the flavor of Her person even Krishna becomes agitated. 7. She
is expert in the art of singing. 8. She can speak very nicely and sweetly. 9.
She is expert in presenting Herself by feminine attraction. 10. She is modest
and gentle. 11. She is always very merciful. 12. She is transcendentally cunning.
13. She knows how to dress nicely. 14. She is always shy. 15. She is always
respectful. 16. She is always patient. 17. She is very grave. 18. She is enjoyable
by Krishna. 19. She is always situated on the highest devotional platform. 20.
She can give shelter to all kinds of devotees. 22. She is always affectionate to
superior and inferior. 23. She is always obliged by the dealings of Her associates.
24. She is the greatest among all the girlfriends of Krishna. 25. She always
keeps Krishna under Her control.

So Krishna and Radharani are both transcendentally qualified, and both
are attractive for each other. But still, in that transcendental attractiveness,
Radharani is better than Krishna. This attractiveness of Radharani is the
transcendental taste in conjugal love. Similarly, there are transcendental tastes
in the flavors of servitude, friendship, and other relationships with Krishna.
They can be described as follows, with reference to the context of Bhakti
Rasamrita Sindhu.

Persons who have been thoroughly cleansed by devotional service and
are always joyful and full of elevated consciousness, who are very much
attached to the studies of Srimad Bhagwatam, always cheerful in the association
of devotees, and who have accepted the Lotus Feet of Krishna as the ultimate
shelter of their lives; who are pleased to perform all details of devotional
service—have in their pure hearts the transcendental ecstasy of attachment,
developed out of old and new reformatory performance. That state of being,
enriched with love of Krishna and transcendental experience, becomes gradually developed into the mature oneness of spiritual life. Such a spiritual taste of
life cannot be possible for those who are not in Krishna Consciousness and
in devotional service.

This fact is further corroborated in the Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu, where it is
126 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

said: “For the non-devotee it is very difficult to understand the taste of devotional service. Only one who has completely taken shelter of the Lotus Feet
of Krishna, and whose life is merged in the ocean of devotional service, can
understand this transcendental relish.”

Lord Chaitanya thus explained briefly about the transcendental situation
or spiritual relish of life, and He said that this is the fifth stage of perfection.
The first stage of perfection is to become a religious man in the ordinary sense
in the material world. The second stage of perfection is to become materially
rich. The third, stage of material perfection is complete sense enjoyment;
and the fourth stage of material existence is knowledge of liberation. But
above liberation are those who are already liberated: they can stand on the
fifth stage of perfection, which is called Krishna Consciousness, or devotional
service to the Lord. The highest perfection of such devotional service in Krishna
Consciousness is described as the taste of the ecstasy of spiritual relish.

The Lord then related to Sanatan Goswami that, before teaching him,
He had already taught his younger brother, Rupa Goswami, at Prayag Allahabad. He assured Sanatan Goswami that Rupa Goswami had been empowered
by Him to spread the knowledge which He had given him. Similarly, He
ordered Sanatan Goswami to write books on the transcendental loving service
of the Lord, and authorized him to re-excavate the different sites of Krishna’s
Pastimes in the district of Mathura. He was also advised to construct temples
at Vrindaban, and to write books on the principles of Vaishnavism, as authorized by Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Sanatan Goswami executed all His
desires; he constructed the temple of Madanmohan at Vrindaban, and he
wrote books on the principles of devotional service such as Hari Bhakti
Vilasa.

Lord Chaitanya taught Sanatan Goswami how to live in the material
world in complete relationship with Krishna, and He taught him also that
there is no necessity of dry renunciation. The purport is that, in the present
day, there are many persons who accept the renounced order of life without
any spiritual advancement. Lord Chaitanya did not approve of such acceptance of Sannyasa without perfect knowledge in Krishna Consciousness. Actually
we find that there are many so called Sannyasis who are acting like less than
ordinary men, yet are passing themselves off as the renounced order of life.
Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu did not accept such hypocrisy, and He taught
Sanatan Goswami to write elaborately on the subject matter in his different

books.

This perfectional stage of spiritual life, even while being in the material
The Ecstacy of the Lord and His Devotees 127

world, is described in the Twelfth Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita as follows:
“Such a devotee, who is not envious of any living entity, who is friendly,
who is merciful, who is detached from material possessions, who is situated
in pure identification without any false conception of the body, who is equipoised both in happiness and distress, who is forgiving, always satisfied and
always engaged in devotional service, always being surrendered with body
and mind unto the Supreme Lord—he is very dear to Me.” Such a devotee,
who never gives trouble to any living entity either by the body or by the
mind, who is never affected by material distress and happiness, is never angry
or pleased with anything material, who is freed from all kinds of material
affection, is very dear to the Supreme Lord. Such a devotee is never dependent
on anyone in this world. He who is a soul completely surrendered to the
Supreme Lord, who is purified, expert, neutral, painless, and aloof from any
material endeavor which requires too much attention—such a devotee is
also very dear to Lord Krishna.

A person who is never subjected to material happiness, material hatred,
lamentation and ambition, and who 1s aloof from all auspicious and inauspicious
activities of the material world and fully devoted in Krishna Consciousness—
he is very dear to Lord Krishna. A devotee who treats equally a so-called
enemy, and a so-called friend in the material world, and who is not disturbed
by any warmth or coolness due to the affection of his skin, and who is without
any attachment and equally situated when he is respected or when insulted,
always grave, satisfied in any condition of life, without any fixed house for
residence and always fixed in Krishna Consciousness—is very dear to Lord
Krishna. Even if one is not situated in some transcendental position, still; if
and when one approves of such transcendental life he also becomes very dear
to Krishna.

In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Second Canto, Second Chapter, there is a very
nice verse in which it is said that a devotee should always remain dependent
on the mercy of the Supreme Lord. As far as his material necessities are concerned, he should be satisfied with whatever is obtained without any endeavor.
Sukdeva Goswami advised in that connection: that a devotee should never
approach a materialistic person for any kind of help. So far as his bodily necessities are concerned, he may pick up a torn cloth thrown in the street, he can
take fruits offered by the tree, he can drink water which is flowing in the
river, and he can live in the cave constructed by Nature herself, in the hill and
mountain regions. Above all, if he is unable to do all these things, he should
completely depend on the Supreme Lord, understanding that the Supreme
128 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Lord provides everyone with food and shelter, and therefore He will never
fail to care for His devotees who have fully surrendered unto Him. In both
ways the devotee is always protected, and therefore he should not be at all
anxious for his maintenance of life. Sanatan Goswami thus inquired into all
phases of devotional service, and Lord Chaitanya taught him most confidentially from authoritative Scriptures like Srimad Bhagwatam in the matter of
devotional service and Krishna Consciousness.

He then referred to the Vedic literature known as Harivansa, about the
situation of the transcendental Abode of Krishna. This information was disclosed by Indra when he offered his prayer after his defeat in challenging the
potency of Krishna. In the Harivansa it is stated that above the Earth there is
sky, where the birds can fly, and those who are expert in operating airplanes
can fly; but the birds and those flying airplanes are unable to reach the higher
planetary systems. The first higher planetary system begins from the Sun
planet. The Sun planet is situated in the middle of the Universe, and above
the Sun planet there are other planetary systems where persons elevated by
great austerities and penances are situated.

The whole material Universe is called Devidhain, and above the Devidham,
there is Shivadham, where Lord Shiva with his wife Parvati eternally reside.
In that planetary system is the Spiritual Sky, where innumerable Spiritual
Planets, known as Vaikunthas, are situated. And, above Them, there is
Krishna's Planet known as Goloka. Goloka means the planet of the cows.
Krishna is very fond of cows, and therefore His Abode is known as Goloka.
Goloka is bigger than all the material and spiritual planets put together.

In that prayer of Harivansa, Indra admitted that he could not understand
the situation of Goloka even by asking Brahma. Those who are devotees of
Narayana, another expansion of Krishna, become situated in the Vaikuntha
Planets; but it is very difficult to reach the Goloka Planet. That can be reached
only by persons who are devotees of Lord Chaitanya or Lord Sri Krishna.
Indra then admitted that, “You have descended from that Goloka Planet
in the Spiritual World, and the disturbance which I have created was due
to my foolishness”—and he therefore begged excuse from Lord Krishna.

The last phase of the Pastimes of Lord Krishna is described in the Srimad
Bhagwatam as Mousala Leela, including the mystery of Krishna’s disappearance
from this material world. He played a Pastime that He was killed by a hunter.
There are many disruptive explanations of the last portions of Lord Krishna’s
Pastimes, such as the description of the incarnation of His hair, and Lord
Chaitanya described them in their right interpretation.
The Ecstacy of the Lord and His Devotees 120

As far as the incarnation of King Kansa is concerned, this is mentioned
in Srimad Bhagwatam, in the Vishnu Purana, and in Mahabharata. It is stated
there that the Lord snatched from His Head two kinds of hair: a grey hair
and a black hair, and the separate hairs entered into the wombs of two queens
of the Yadu dynasty, namely Rohini and Devaki. It is stated there that Lord
Krishna descends to this material world for vanquishing all the demons; but
some say that Krishna is the incarnation of Vishnu, Who is lying on the ocean
of milk within this Universe. Srila Rupa Goswami and his commentator,
Sri Valadev Vidya Bihshan, have discussed this point fully, and have established
the exact truth. Sri Jiva Goswami also. discussed this point in the Krishna
Sandarbha.

When Lord Chaitanya finished his instruction to Sri Sanatan Goswami,
Sanatan, being empowered and enlightened, was so transcendentally pleased
that he at once fell at the Feet of Lord Chaitanya, and began to speak:

“Tam born of a very low family and I have always been in association with
lowly people, and therefore I am the lowest of the sinful persons. But You
are so kind that You have taught me lessons which are not even understandable by the greatest being, Brahma. And by Your grace I have appreciated
the conclusions which You have taught me. But I am so low that I cannot
touch even a drop of the ocean of Your instruction. If You therefore want
me, who am nothing but a lame man, to dance—then kindly give me Your
benediction, by placing Your Feet on my head.”

He prayed for the Lord’s confirmation that the teachings might be actually
evolved in his heart, by the grace of the Lord—otherwise there was no possibility of them being described by him. The purport is that Acharyas, or spiritual masters, are authorized by higher authorities. Instruction alone cannot
make one an expert. Unless one is blessed by the spiritual master, or the
Acharya, such teaching cannot become fully manifested. Therefore, one
should seek the mercy of the spiritual master, so that the instruction of the
spiritual master may develop within himself. After the prayer of Sanatan
Goswami, Lord Chaitanya placed His Feet over the head of Sanatan, and gave
him benediction, that all the instruction He had given him would develop
in him fully.

That was the description of the ultimate stage of love of Godhead. Lord
Chaitanya said that such a description cannot be made very elaborately, but
He had informed him as far as possible.

CONCLUSION: Anyone who attentively hears these discussions and
instructions of Lord Chaitanya to Sanatan Goswami very soon becomes
130 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

situated in Krishna Consciousness, and can be engaged in devotional service
to the Lord.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN

 

Explanation of the Atmarama

Verse in Srimad Bhagwatam

Lord Chaitanya next explained a verse, appearing in Srimad Bhagwatam,
which is very famous and known as the Atmarama verse: It runs as follows:
Atmaramas cha munayanirg rantha apiurukrame, Kurvanti ahaituki bhaktim ittlhvambhuta guna harih. The general meaning is that those who are liberated souls and
fully satisfied within themselves will later become devotees of the Lord. This
is especially meant for the impersonalist class, because the impersonalist souls
have no information of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They try to be
satisfied in the impersonal Brahman, but Krishna is so attractive and so strong
that He attracts even the minds of such impersonalists. That is the purport of
the verse.

This verse had been explained previously to a great Vedantist, known as
Sarvabhouma Bhattacharya. Sanatan Goswami, after taking his lessons from
Lord Chaitanya, referred the incident to the Lord and prayed again for His
explanation of the Atmarama verse. The author of Chaitanya Charitamrita,
appreciating this explanation of the Atmarama verse, has glorified Lord Chai
131
132 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

tanya by his prayer. Sanatan Goswami fell flat at the Feet of Lord Chaitanya,
and requested Him to explain the Atmarama verse as He formerly had explained
it to Sarvabhouma Bhattacharya. He explained his eagerness to hear the same
explanation again, so that he might be enlightened.

When the Lord was thus requested by Sanatan Goswami He replied:
“I do not understand why Sarvabhouma Bhattacharya has so much appreciated my explanation. As far as I am concerned I don’t remember what I said
to him. But because you are asking, I shall try to explain whatever I can remember, by your association.” The speaker.and the audience are very intimately
connected; the speaker is enlightened by the presence of the audience. In
transcendental subject matters the speaker or the Master can speak very nicely
in relationship with the understanding of the audience. Therefore, Lord Chaitanya said, “Generally I do not know how to explain a Sanskrit verse, but I
shall try to explain whatever I can by your association only.”

He then said that there are 11 different items in the Atmarama verse. They
are as follows: 1. Atmarama, 2. Cha, 3. Munayah, 4. Nirgrantha, 5. Api, 6. Urukrame, 7. Kurvanti, 8. Ahaituki, 9. Bhaktim, 10. Itthvambhuta, 11. Harih.
The Lord then began to explain each and every items as mentioned above:

So far as Atmarama is concerned, He said that the word Atma is used to mean:
1. the Supreme Absolute Truth, 2. the body, 3. the mind, 4. endeavor, 5.
intelligence, 6. conviction, and 7. nature. Therefore, anyone who takes pleasure in the cultivation of the knowledge of these items, is called Atmarama.
(The Lord explained hereinafter' about the different kinds of Atmarama,
or transcendentalists).

The next item is Muni. Persons who are very great thinkers are called
Muni. Sometimes this Muni is also used for persons who are very grave. Muni
is also used for great sages, great austere persons, great mystics and learned
scholars.

The fourth item, Nirgrantha, means freed from the bondage of illusion.
Another meaning of Nirgrantha is “one who has no connection with spiritual
injunctions.” Grantha means revealed Scriptures. There are many instructions
for spiritual realization, but persons who have no connection with such Scriptural injunctions are also known as Nirgrantha. Nir is an affix which is used with
three meanings: it is used to mean no connection, and to mean constructing,
and also prohibiting. There are many persons who are foolish, low-born
and misbehaved, and they have no entrance into the revealed Scriptures and
injunctions. Therefore, they are also called Nirgrantha. Because Grantha is
also used for the purpose of riches, and for the purpose of collection, therefore
Explanation of the Atmarama Verse in Srimad Bhagwatam 133

Nirgrantha, in other words, means one who is after collecting riches and
who is bereft of all riches.

The word Urukrama is used in the sense of a highly powerful person.
Krama is also used in the sense of stepping: one who can step very far forward
is also called Urukrama. The greatest stepping forward was shown by Lord
Vamanadev: by stepping forward with His Foot, He covered the whole Universe. Therefore, Urukrama means the Supreme Lord Vamanadev. This extraordinary feature of Lord Vamanadev is explained in the Srimad Bhagwatam
as follows: “Nobody can estimate the inconceivable potencies of Lord Vishnu.
Even if one can count the number of the atomic combinations of this material
world, still he is not able to count the different energies of the Supreme Lord.
The Lord, Vamanadev, was so powerful that by stepping forward with His
foot He covered the whole Universe, beginning from the Brahmaloka down
to the Patalaloka.”

The inconceivable energies of the Lord are spread all over the Creation
of the Supreme Lord. He is All-pervading, and by His energy He sustains all
planetary systems. And, by His display of pleasure potency, He is situated in His
personal Abode, known as Goloka. By His expansion of opulence He is situated
all over the Vaikuntha Planets as Narayan. By expanding His material energy,
He has created innumerable Universes with innumerable planets within
them. Therefore, no one can estimate the wonderful activities of the Supreme
Lord. As such, the Supreme Lord is known as Urukrama, or the wonderful
Actor.

In the Visvaprakash Dictionary, the meaning of the word Krama is described
as an expert display of energies, as well as stepping forward very quickly,
and the word Kurvanti is used for working for others. There is another word
similar to this, used when the activities are done for one’s personal sense gratification. But the word Kurvanti is used when activities are performed for the
satisfaction of the Supreme. Therefore this word can be used only for the purpose of rendering transcendental service to the Lord.

The word Hetu is used as the reason, or the cause. People are engaged generally in transcendental activities for three causes: namely, some of them want
material happiness, some of them want mystic perfection, and some of them
want liberation from this material bondage. So far as material enjoyment is
concerned, there are varieties; nobody can ennumerate how many kinds of
material enjoyments there are. So far as perfections in mystic powers are concerned, there are eighteen. So far as kinds of liberation from the material bondage are concerned, there are five. The state of being where all these different
34 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

kinds of enjoyment are conspicuous by their absence is called Ahaituki. The
qualification Ahaituki is especially mentioned because by Ahaituki service of
the Lord one can achieve the favor of the Lord.

The word Bhakti is taken in ten different ways. Out of the ten, one is called
Sadhan Bhakti, occupational devotional service. The other nine are called
Prema Bhakti, love of Godhead. Those who are situated in the neutral position
attain the development of perfection up to love of Godhead. Similarly, those
who are situated in the relationship of master and servant attain love of Godhead
up to the stage of attachment. Those who are in the relationship of friends
attain their love of Godhead up to the point of fraternity. Those who are in
love of Godhead as parents are elevated up to the point of emotion. But only
those who are in conjugal love with the Supreme have ecstasy elevated to the
highest of ecstasies. These are the different meanings of the term Bhakti.

The Lord then explained the different meanings of itthambhutagunah. He
also explained the word Guna in its different meanings. Ittham bhuta means full
transcendental, before which even the transcendental pleasure known as
Brahmananda becomes like straw. In the Hari Bhakti Sudhodaya it is said by the
devotee: “My Lord, O Supreme, simply by understanding You or seeing
You, the pleasure which we derive is so great that the pleasure in Brahmananda
becomes insignificant.” In other words, the pleasure derived by understanding
Krishna as He is, the All-attractive Reservoir of all pleasures, and the Reservoir of all pleasure-giving tastes, with all transcendental qualifications, attracts
one to become His devotee. By such attraction one can give up fruitive activities, endeavoring for liberation, or the intense desire to achieve success
in Yoga mystic power. The attractive power of Krishna is so intense, that without any respect for any other means of self-realization, one surrenders unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead—simply by that attraction.

Guna means the unlimited transcendental qualities of Krishna, primarily
His Sat-Chit-Ananda Form. In His transcendental blissful knowledge and eternity He is fully perfect; and, therefore, such perfection becomes more manifest
when He becomes controlled by the attention of the devotee. God is so kind
and merciful that He can give Himself in exchange for the devotional service
of a devotee. His transcendental qualities are such that His perfection in His
beauty, His perfect reciprocation of love between Himself and His devotees,
and His flavor of all transcendental qualities attract different kinds of transcendentalists and liberated souls, by different manifestations of these qualities.

For example, He attracted the mind of one of the Kumaras, Sanaka,
simply by the flavor of the flowers offered to Him. And the mind of
Explanation of the Atmarama Verse in Srimad Bhagwatam 135

Sukadeva Goswami was attracted by the transcendental Pastimes of Lord
Krishna. He attracted by His Personal Beauty the minds of the damsels of Vrindaban, and He attracted the attention of Rukmini by His bodily feature and
transcendental qualities. He attracts the mind of the Goddess of Fortune by
playing the flute and by different other features of transcendental attraction.
He attracts the minds of all young girls; He attracts the minds of elderly ladies
by His childlike activities; and He attracts the minds of His friends by His
friendly activities. When He appeared in Vrindaban, He attracted even the
birds and beasts and the trees and the plants. Everyone became attracted in
love and affection for Krishna.

The word Hari has different meanings, of which two are principals. Hari
means that He takes away all inauspicious things from the devotee’s life,
and that He attracts the mind of the devotee by awarding him transcendental
love of Godhead. He is so attractive that anybody remembering Krishna in
some way or other becomes free from the four kinds of material miseries.
With special attention for His devotee, the Lord banishes the devotee’s different
forms of sinful activities, which are a stumbling block for the advancement
of devotional service. This is called routing the influence of ignorance. And,
by hearing alone, one develops love for Him. That is the gift of the Lord.
On one side He takes away our inauspicious things, and on the other side
He awards the most auspicious things. That is the meaning of Hari.

When a person becomes developed in love of Godhead, then by His attractive power of transcendental qualities, He attracts the devotees body, mind
and everything for the Lord. Such are the merciful activities of Krishna and
such are His transcendental qualities. He is so attractive that, out of transcendental attachment for Him, a devotee will give up all the four principles of spiritual life: namely religiousness, economic development, regulation of sense
gratification, and salvation. The words Api and Cha are adverbs. They can be
utilized for virtually any purpose, but still the purpose of Cha, or “and,”
means that the whole construction may have seven different readings.

The Lord established the import of eleven items in the verse of Atma
rama. Then He began to explain the imports of each item as follows: the
word Brahman means the greatest in all respects. He is the greatest in all opulences. Nobody can excel over His richness, nobody can excel over His strength,
nobody can excel over His fame, nobody can excel over His beauty, nobody
can excel over His knowledge, and nobody can excel over His renunciation.

Therefore, the real meaning of Brahman is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krishna.
136 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

In the Vishnu Purana the meaning of Brahman is given: He is the greatest
and there is no limit to His expanding as the greatest. One may conceive of
Brahman’s greatness, yet it is growing in such a way that nobody can estimate
how far or how great He actually is.

That Supreme Personality of Godhead is realized in three aspects, but they
are all one and the same. The Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality, Krishna,
is everlasting. In the Srimad Bhagwatam it is said that He exists before the manifestation of this cosmic world, and He exists during its continuance, and He
will continue to exist after the annihilation of this cosmic manifestation. Therefore, He is the Soul of everything great. He is All-pervading, He is All-witnessing, and He is the Supreme Form of everything.

To understand and achieve that Supreme perfection of the Absolute Truth,
there are three different kinds of transcendental processes mentioned in the
Vedic literature. They are called: the process of knowledge, the process of
mystic Yoga, and the process of devotional service. The followers of different
processes realize the Supreme Truth in different aspects; namely, those who
are following the process of knowledge realize Him as impersonal Brahman;
those who are following the process of Yoga realize Him as the localized Supersoul; and those who are following the process of devotional service realize
Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krishna. In other words,
although Brahman means Krishna and nothing else, still, according to the process followed by different transcendentalists, He is realized in three different
aspects.

So far as devotional service is concerned, it is divided into two processes.
In the beginning, it is called Bidhibhakti, or devotional service with regulated
principles. And in the highest stage it is called Raga bhakti, or devotional service in pure love.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Absolute Truth, but He
is manifested by expansions of different energies also. Those who are following
the principles of devotional service in regulative forms ultimately achieve
the Vaikunthas in the Spiritual World. Whereas one who is following the
principles of love in devotional service reaches to the Supreme Abode, Krishna
Loka or Goloka.

The transcendentalists can also be divided into three: namely the Akama,
or one who does not have any material desires; the Moksa kama, or persons
who seek liberation from the material miseries; and Sarva kama, or persons who
have material desires to enjoy. The most intelligent transcendentalist gives
up all other processes and engages himself in the devotional service of the Lord,
Explanation of the Afmarama Verse in Srimad Bhagwatam 137

even though he may have many desires. Not by any kind of transcendental
activities, either in fruitive action or the cultivation of knowledge, nor by
mystic yogic cultivation, can a person achieve the highest perfection, without
adding a tinge of devotional service to them.

Except for devotional service, all other forms of transcendental processes
are just like nipples on the neck of a goat. There are some nipples hanging on
the neck of a goat, but they do not supply milk. If one is to derive, therefore,
the actual perfection of his process he must take to the devotional service of
Krishna.

In Bhagavad Gita it is stated, in the Seventh Chapter, 16th verse, that there
are four kinds of beginners in devotional service whose backgrounds are very
righteous. They are the distressed, the inquisitive, the seeker of material profit,
and the Jnani, or the wise man. These four kinds of people, when they are coated
by previous righteous activities, come to the devotional service of the Lord.
Out of these four, those who are distressed and those who are in need of material possessions are called devotees with desires, whereas the other two, the inquisitive and the wise, are under the heading of seeking liberation. But, because they
worship Krishna, they are considered to be very fortunate. In due course of
time, if they give up all their desires and become pure devotees of the Supreme
Lord, they are called the most fortunate.

Such fortunate beginners can develop only in the association of pure devotees of Lord Krishna. When one is associated with such pure devotees, one
becomes a pure devotee himself. This is confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam
in the First Canto, Tenth Chapter, as follows: “A person who is actually
intelligent is able, by association with pure devotees, to hear about Lord Krishna and His activities.” These activities are very attractive, and he does not
give up such association with the Lord.

Except for the association of pure devotees, any association is called Kaitava, or cheating. This is also confirmed in Srimad Bhagwatam, First Canto;
where it is stated that any cheating process which obstructs transcendental
realization is to be thrown off. By the Srimad Bhagwatam one can understand
reality as it is, and that becomes auspicious in helping one to transcend the
three kinds of material miseries. Srimad Bhagwatam is compiled by the greatest
sage, Vyasadeva, as a work of his mature experience; and therefore, by understanding Srimad Bhagwatam, one can immediately capture the Supreme Lord
within his heart, by devotional service.

Lord Chaitanya then explained¥that the word Projjhitta means desire for
liberation, which is explained by one great commentator as the most obstruc138 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

tive stumbling block for realization of the Supreme Lord. But, somehow or
other, if somebody comes to Krishna and begins to hear about Him, Krishna
is so kind that He awards him His Lotus Feet as a center for the devotee. Such
a devotee or transcendentalist forgets everything and engages himself in the
devotional service of the Lord.

For anyone who comes to the Lord in devotional service, or in full Krishna
Consciousness, the reward is the Supreme. Once engaged for the Supreme,
he will no longer ask for anything, as does the distressed man and he who
desires material possessions. The method of devotional service, the service
itself, association with pure devotees in the causeless mercy of the Lord—these
three things can act so wonderfully that, whether the devotee is a distressed
soul or in want of material possessions or inquisitive—or even if he is a wise
man cultivating knowledge—he can give up all activities, and his mind becomes
absorbed in Krishna.

The summary is that, henceforward, whatever meaning would apply
for all the words in the Atmarama verse will be meant only for Krishna.

So far, Lord Chaitanya has spoken only of the introduction to the Atmarama
verse. Now he will explain its real position:

In the cultivation of knowledge there are two kinds of transcendentalists.
One of them is the worshipper of the impersonal Brahman, and the other is the
desirer of liberation. Monists worship the impersonal feature of Brahman,
and therefore they are called the worshippers of Brahman. The worshippers
of Brahman are divided into three further stages: the neophyte practitioner,
one who is absorbed in Brahman realization, and one who has actually realized
himself as Brahman. If devotional service is added, the knower of Brahman
can then become liberated. Otherwise, there is no possibility.

Anyone who is fully engaged in devotional service in Krishna Consciousness is understood to be already a soul realized in Brahman. Devotional service
is so strong that one is attracted to Krishna even from the process of Brahman
worship. The Lord awards such a devotee the perfection of a spiritual body,
and he is eternally engaged in the transcendental quality of Krishna. When
he understands and becomes attracted by transcendental qualities, he wholeheartedly becomes engaged in devotional service. For example, the four Kumaras and Sukadeva Goswami were liberated souls from the very beginning,
and still, later in life, they became attracted to the Pastimes of Krishna—and
they became devotees. Devotees like the four Kumaras—one of whom, Sanaka
Kumara, was attracted by the flavor of the flowers offered to Krishna—were
all attracted by the transcendental qualities of the Lord, and thus became
Explanation of the Atmarama Verse in Srimad Bhagwatam 139

engaged in His devotional service. The nine mystics mentioned in the Eleventh
Canto of Srimad Bhagwatam are understood to have been transcendentalists
from birth by hearing the transcendental qualities of Krishna from Brahma
and Lord Shiva and Narada.

Sometimes one becomes attracted to Krishna and His transcendental
qualities simply by looking upon the beautiful features of His transcendental
Body, and in that case also one gives up the desire for liberation and becomes
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. The devotee repents his loss
of time in the so-called cultivation of knowledge, and becomes a pure devotee
of the Lord.

There are two kinds of liberated souls even in this material body: the soul
liberated by devotional service, and the soul liberated by the cultivation
of knowledge. The difference is that the liberated soul in devotional service
becomes more and more elevated, being attracted by the transcendental qualities of Krishna, whereas the dry speculators who simply cultivate knowledge
without any connection with devotional service become fallen on account
of their many offences.

This is confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Second Chapter.
It is said there, “O my Lord, the intelligence of those who think themselves
liberated without a touch of devotional service is not pure, because, even
though they rise to the highest point of liberation by severe penances and austerity, still, with no center at Your Lotus Feet, they are sure to fall down again
into this material existence.” Bhagavad Gita also confirms this, in the Eighteenth Chapter, 54th verse—one who is actually situated in the Brahman realization has nothing to lament for and nothing to desire. He is equipoised toward
everyone, and thus is eligible for being situated in devotional service.

This same thing is accepted by Bilvamongal Thakur. In his later life, he
lamented that, “I was situated as a monist, to become One with the Supreme
Lord, but somehow or other, I contacted a Naughty Boy, and I became His
eternal servitor.” In other words, those who become self-realized souls by executing devotional service can achieve a transcendental body, and by being
attracted to the transcendental qualities of Krishna, they become engaged fully
in pure devotional service.

Anyone who is not attracted to Krishna is understood to be still under
the spell of Maya. Therefore, one who is trying to be liberated by devotional
service is actually liberated from the spell of Maya. In the Eleventh Canto
of Srimad Bhagwatam there are many instances of devotees who became liberated
in this life simply by their engagement in devotional service.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN

 

Conclusion of Teachings to

Sanatan Goswami

Persons who desire liberation by the cultivation of knowledge are of
three kinds: the desirers for liberation; the liberated in this material existence;
and the actually self-realized. As for desiring to become liberated, there are
many such persons in this world, and sometimes they engage themselves in
devotional service for this purpose. It is corroborated also in Srimad Bhagwatam,
in the First Canto, Second Chapter, that those who actually desire liberation
give up all kinds of worship of the demigods, and, without being envious of
them concentrate their minds in the worship of Narayan, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such persons are engaged in the service of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Narayan; and when they are in contact with pure devotees, they become engaged in the devotional service of Krishna, and give up
the idea of liberation. In the Hari Bhakti Sudhodaya, there is anice verse in which
it is stated: “O great soul, although there are many faults within this miserable
life, yet there is one glory—the association of pure devotees. Cultivate such
association. By such association our desire for liberation diminishes,”

I40
Conclusion of Teachings to Sanatan Goswami I4I

In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Eleventh Canto, Second Chapter, verse 35,
it is stated that man’s fearfulness is due to his material conception of life and to
his forgetting his eternal relationship with the Supreme Lord. Therefore,
he finds himself having only perverted memories. Such things have happened
due to the spell of material energy. Therefore, a person with enough intelligence
will engage himself in full devotional service with the Supreme Lord as his
Spiritual Master and worshippable God. The purport is that nobody can attain
a revolution without being engaged in devotional service to the Lord. When,
however, he is free from this material contamination, he can fully engage himself in Krishna Consciousness.

In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, it is clearly
said that, for a person who is engaged in devotional service to understand things
as they are, but who lacks any intention of being engaged in Krishna Consciousness, the trouble undergone for his understanding is his only achievement.
There is no substance to his life. Every living entity is part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord, and therefore it is the duty of every living entity to serve that
Supreme Whole. Without doing that the living entity falls into material
contamination, and his service is lost.

Lord Chaitanya then concluded that these six kinds of Atmarama engage
themselves in some kind of devotional service to Krishna. In other words,
all the transcendentalists at different times ultimately come to the understanding
of rendering devotional service to Krishna, and become fully Krishna conscious. Even when one is very learned, or if one is very extravangant, still,
he can be engaged in the devotional service of the Lord.

The six kinds of transcendentalists are the neophyte transcendentalist,
the absorbed transcendentalist, one actually situated in transcendence, a person
caring for liberation, persons actually liberated, and persons who are actually
engaged in their constitutional position. All of them are called Atmarama.
When a person becomes Afmarama, or a great thinker in Krishna Consciousness,
he is fully engaged in devotional service. There are many Atmaramas according
to the grammatical rules, but one word, Atmarama, is sufficient to represent
all other Atmaramas. In the collective sense all the Atmaramas are inclined to
worship the Supreme Lord Krishna.

The mystic who worships the Supersoul within himself is also called Atmarama. Such Atmarama yogis are of two kinds: the one is called Sagarbha,
the other is called Nigarbha. In Srimad Bhagwatam it is stated, in the Second
Canto, Second Chapter: “Some of the yogis meditate within the heart on the
localized situation of Vishnu, Who is four-handed with four symbols: the
142 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

conch shell, the wheel, the club and the lotus.” The yogi who thinks of the
four-handed Vishnu becomes developed in devotional ecstasy, and attains the
different symptoms of that position. Sometimes he cries, sometimes he feels
separation. In this way he becomes merged in transcendental bliss. So, as
a result of such transcendental bliss, he is practically entrapped like a fish.

Such Sagarbha and Nigarbha yogis can be divided into three: the beginner,
the person who is already on the ascendent, and he who has already achieved
a perfection. In the Bhagavad Gita they have been described in the Sixth Chapter
as follows: Persons who are trying to ascend on the path of the mystic Yoga
system are called Aruruksha. In Aruruksha Yoga there are different kinds of sitting postures and there is concentration of the mind. For one who is already
ascended on the path of Yoga, meditation and detachment are the causes.
And when one has no attachment for working in the matter of sense gratification, then gradually he becomes free, and becomes situated in ecstasy and
is called Yoga Rudha. Such mystic yogis, if they in some way or other come in
contact with a saintly person, also are converted to become devotees of Krishna.

So far as the word Urukrama is concerned, it is already explained: Urukrama
means the Supreme Lord, and all these Atmaramas are engaged in devotional
service to Urukrama. Before engaging themselves in devotional service, such
transcendentalists are called Shantas, or they are called pacified devotees.

Atma, self, is also known as the mind. Sometimes there are mental speculationists who present philosophical thoughts in different ways, but when they
come into contact with saintly persons engaged in devotional service, they
also become devotees.

Concerning the two classes of yogis, Sagarbha and Nigarbha, the Srimad
Bhagwatam, in the Tenth Canto, Eighty-seventh Chapter, describes them
as follows: “The yogis begin their practice by worshipping the abdomen,
and try to concentrate their attention on their intestines. Then gradually they
rise to the heart, and concentrate the mind on the heart. Then gradually they
rise to the top of the head. One who can rise to that portion is understood
to have become perfect, and is no longer subjected to birth and death.” Even
such yogis, if they come in contact with pure devotees, will also render causeless devotional service to the Lord.

Another meaning of Atma is to endeavor. In every practice there is endeavor,
and the ultimate endeavor is to reach the highest perfectional stage of devotional
service. In the Srimad Bhagwatam, First Canto, Fifth Chapter, 18th verse, it is
stated that one should try for the highest achievement, which cannot be atConclusion of Teachings to Sanatan Goswami 143

tained even in the highest planetary system—nor in the lowest. The idea is that
material happiness and miseries are available, in the course of time, in any
of the planetary systems; but the highest achievement, devotional service,
cannot be achieved anywhere without endeavor. Therefore, in the Narada
Purana, it is said that one who is serious about understanding the highest perfectional stage of devotional service, simply by his endeavor, can become successful in everything.

One cannot, therefore, achieve the highest perfectional stage of devotional service without personal endeavor. And, as is stated in the Bhagavad
Gita, Tenth Chapter: “For he who is constantly engaged in such devotional
service, the Supreme Lord, Who is situated in everyone's heart, gives the intelligence by which he can make undeterred progress in devotional activities.”

The word Atma is also meant for patience and perseverance. By patience
and perseverance one can achieve the highest stage of devotional service.

Another meaning for Muni is “the bird and large black bee.” Another
meaning of Nirgrantha is “the foolish person.” Even the birds, even the black bee,
and even the foolish engage themselves in the service of the Supreme Lord, when
they are favored by the pure devotee. For example, it is stated in the Srimad
Bhagwatam that the birds are devoted to the service of the Supreme Lord.
In the Tenth Canto, Fifteenth Chapter, there is a statement that the black bees
are following Krishna and Valarama. Taking that incident, Lord Valarama
described the devotional service of the wasps unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. He said, “O Supremely Virtuous One, the Original Personality
of Godhead, just see how these bees and wasps are following You, glorifying
Your transcendental Fame, and thus worshipping You. Actually, these wasps
are not as they appear, but they are great sages, and are taking the opportunity
to worship the Supreme Soul now. Although You are not knowable by ordinary persons, still they know You and they are following You and glorifying
You.”

Similarly, there is another verse in Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Fifteenth Chapter, in which the peacocks were receiving Valarama and Krishna,
and it is said in this connection: “O Worshippable One, just see how the peacocks who are returning to their nests are receiving You in full pleasure. The
peacocks are just like the damsels of Vraja. And the cuckoos on the branches
of the trees are also receiving You in their own way. The residents of Vrindaban are so glorious that everyone is prepared to render their respective devotional service to the Lord.”

Similarly, there is another verse in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto,
144 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Thirty-fifth Chapter, 11th verse, in which it is stated. “O just see how the cranes
and swans on the water are singing the glories of the Lord! And they are meditating, standing in the water, worshipping the Supreme Lord.” There is another
verse in Srimad Bhagwatam, Second Canto, Fourth Chapter, in which it is stated:
“Even the aborigines and uncivilized human beings like Kiratas, Huns, Andhra,
Pulinda, Pukksa, Abhira, Kank, Yuvana and Khasa, and many other human
beings in the lower species of life—all can be purified simply by taking center of
the pure devotees.” So Sukadeva Goswami offered his respectful obeisances
unto the Lord, Vishnu, Whose devotees can work so wonderfully.

Another meaning of Driti is to realize oneself as elevated. In that position
one feels himself free from all miseries, and is elevated to the highest standard
of life. Therefore, all devotees of Krishna in full Krishna Consciousness are free
from all kinds of material pleasures. They are full with the service of the Lord,
and they are always jolly, being engaged in such transcendental service. They
are experienced men of happiness. They are so happy that they do not even
desire to be promoted to the spiritual planets, because they are happy in every
sphere of life. Being fully in the transcendental service of the Lord, they do
not desire any material things or material sense pleasures. There is another verse
spoken by the Goswamis in which it is stated, “Persons who have fixed up their
moving senses in the service of the Supreme Lord can be called peaceful.”

And so, Atmarama means that even the birds, even the beasts, even the
fools—everyone—becomes attracted by the transcendental qualities of Krishna,
and they engage in His service, and therefore become liberated.

Still another meaning of Atma is “intelligence.” One who has special intelligence is also called Atmarama. Such Atmaramas with special intelligence are
of two kinds: One is the learned sage, and another is the fool, one without
book knowledge. But both of them may have the opportunity of associating
with the pure devotee. The foolish Atmaramas can also give up everything,
and in pure devotional service engage themselves in Krishna Consciousness.
In the Srimad Bhagwatam, it is said that the Lord is the Origin of everything,
and that everything emanates from Him. Anyone who is actually intelligent
can understand the Supreme Lord Krishna as the Source of everything, and thus
engages himself in His service. There is another verse in Srimad Bhagwatam,
Second Canto, Seventh Chapter, 45th verse: “What to speak of persons who
are intelligent enough by study of the Vedas—even less intelligent persons,
like the woman, the laborer class and the Huna savarapi, the birds, the beasts—
everyone can achieve the highest perfectional stage of life.” It is stated in the
Bhagavad Gita, Tenth Chapter, 1oth verse, that when a person becomes highly
Conclusion of Teachings to Sanatan Goswami 145

intelligent and engages himself in Krishna Consciousness, then Krishna in
reciprocation gives him the intelligence by which he can be promoted to the
Abode of the Supreme Lord.

The Lord said to Sanatan Goswami that the association of good devotees,
engagement in the transcendental service of the Lord, understanding Srimad
Bhagwatam, and chanting the Holy Name of the Lord, as well as residing in
a place like Vrindaban or Mathura—these five things are very important for
elevating oneself to the transcendental plane. Not to speak of attaining all the
five—if one becomes expert in one of them, then he also is, without fail,
elevated to the stage of love of Godhead. But anyone who is actually intelligent
should give up all other desires and engage himself in the transcendental service
of Krishna. The influence of devotional service is such that a person so engaged
gives up all material desires and becomes fully attached to taking center unto
Krishna, being moved by the transcendental qualities of the Lord. That is the
beauty of the Lord to His devotee.

Another meaning of Atma is “nature.” Atmarama means that everyone
is enjoying the particular nature he has acquired. But the ultimate nature,
or the perpetual, eternal nature of the living entity is to serve the Supreme
Lord. Anyone who attains to the perfection of understanding his real nature—
of eternally being the servitor of the Lord—gives up his designative (material,
or bodily) conception of life. That is real knowledge. Those who are in pursuit
of knowledge and get the opportunity of associating with a pure devotee also
become engaged in devotional service of the Lord. Sages like the four Kumaras,
as well as the fools and the birds, can be engaged in the transcendental service
of the Lord. Being favored by Krishna’s causeless mercy, everyone can be
elevated to the standard of Krishna Consciousness.

One becomes attracted by the transcendental qualities of Krishna and begins
his devotional service. It is stated in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto,
Fifteenth Chapter, in glorifying the land of Vrindaban: “This land, Vrajabhumi, is glorified by the touching of Your Sole. By the touching of Your
Fingers, the creepers also glorify You. By Your looking on the hills and the
rivers and the lower animals, they are all glorified. And, so far as the Gopis
are concerned, they, being embraced by Your transcendental Arms, are also
glorified.” The Gopis glorified Vrindaban in the following words: “My
dear friends, all these inhabitants of our Vrajabhumi, including the birds,
beasts and trees, everyone, while seeing Lord Krishna going to the pasturing
ground with His friends, accompanied by Valadeva and singing on Their
flutes—all are glorified.”
146 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

The Lord said that Atma also means “this body.” The yogis who practice
bodily exercises, considering the body as the self, also are elevated to the transcendental service of the Lord if they are associated with pure devotees. There
are many persons who have the concept of this body being the self. They are
engaged in many kinds of fruitive activities, including bathing rituals and ordinary worldly activities. But when they come in contact with a pure devotee,
they also engage themselves in the transcendental service of the Lord.

In the Srimad Bhagwatam, First Canto, Eighteenth Chapter, it is stated:
“O my dear Suta Goswami, you have given us the nectar of Krishna’s Lotus
Feet, although we have become darkened by the sacrificial smoke of these
fruitive activities.” The Srimad Bhagwatam, Fourth Canto, Twenty-first Chapter, states: “The Ganges water is flowing from the tip of the Lotus Feet of Krishna, and by bathing in that Ganges water, everyone—including the fruitive
actors and all the sages—is washing the dirty things from within the mind.”

Those who are in the concept of the body as the self, or those who are full
of material desires, are also called, in a sense, Atmarama. When they are associated with the pure devotees of the Lord, they give up their material desires
and become perfect in the service of the Lord. The best example of this is found
in the Hari Bhakti Sudhodaya, in connection with the character of Druva. In the
Seventh Chapter, 28th verse, it is stated by Maharaj Druva: “My dear Lord,
I came to worship You desirous of having some land on this Earth; but, fortunately, I have You, Who are beyond the perception of great sages and saintly persons. I came to search out some particles of colored glass, but ’'ve found
instead a very valuable gem like You. I am satisfied. I have no desire to ask
You anything.”

There is another meaning to the word Nirgrantha—“foolish hunter,” or
“wretched poor man.” Such a hunter also got salvation and engaged himself
in the devotional service of the Lord by association of the pure devotee Narada.
The following story is about this hunter's meeting with Narada:

There was a hunter in the forest of Prayag, who was fortunate enough
to meet Narada while he was coming back from Vaikuntha after visiting Lord
Narayan. Narada came to Prayag to bathe in the confluence of the Ganges and the
Yamuna. While passing through the forest, he saw a bird lying on the ground,
half-killed, and pierced by an arrow. It was chirping piteously. At another
place he saw a deer flapping in agony. In another place he saw that a boar
was suffering and, in another place, he saw a rabbit flapping in pain. All this
made him very compassionate, and he bagan to think, “Who is the foolish
man that has committed such sinful activities?” A devotee of the Lord is generConclusion of Teachings to Sanatan Goswami 147

ally compassionate for the miseries of the living entities, and so what to speak
of great Narada? He became very aggrieved by this scene, and after proceeding
a few steps, he saw the hunter engaged in hunting with his bow and arrows.
The hunter's complexion was very black, and his eyes were red, and it was
dangerous even to see him standing there with his bow and arrows, just like
an associate of Yamaraja—Death. Seeing him in that position, Narada Muni
entered deeper into the forest and approached him. And, while Narada Muni
was passing through the forest, all the animals who were caught in the hunter’s
traps fled away. The hunter became very angry over this, and he was just going
to call Narada vile names but, by the influence of Narada, who was such a
saintly person, the hunter could not utter ill names.

Rather, with gentle behavior, he inquired from Narada: “My dear sir,
why have you come before me while I am hunting? Are you astray from the
general path? By your coming here all the animals assembled in my traps have
now fled away.”

Narada replied, “Yes, I’m sorry. I have come to you to find my own path,
just to inquire from you. But I have seen that there are many boars and deer
and rabbits on the path, and they are lying on the forest floor flapping before
death, half-dead. Who has committed these sinful acts?”

The hunter replied, “What you have seen is all right; it is done by me.”

Then Narada said, “If you are hunting all these poor animals, why don’t
you kill them at once? You half-kill them, and they are flapping in deathpains. This is a great sin. If you want to kill any animal, why don't you kill
it completely? Why do you leave it half-killed, and allow the animal to die
flapping?”

The hunter replied, “My dear Lord, my name is Mrigari, the enemy
of the animals. According to the teachings of my father, I have been raised
to half-kill the animals by leaving them flapping. When a half-dead animal
flaps, I take great pleasure in that.”

Narada then implored the hunter; “I beg one thing from you, and please
accept it.”

The hunter replied, “Oh, yes sir, I shall give you whatever you like. If
you want some animal skins, come to my home. I have so many skins of animals, tigers, and deer. Whatever you like I shall give you.”

Narada replied, “I do not want such things. But I want something else.
If you kindly grant it to me, then I shall tell you. Please, henceforth from
tomorrow, whenever you kill an animal, please kill it completely, and don’t

leave it half-dead.”
148 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

The hunter replied, “Oh, my dear sir, what are you asking of me? Why
are you asking this? What is the difference between half-killing and killing
completely?”

Narada replied, “If you half-kill the animals, then they suffer too much
pain, and if you give too much pain to other living entities, it is a great sin.
When you kill an animal completely, there is much offense, but it is not so
great as that accrued by half-killing an animal. In other words, pain which
you give to the half-dead animals will have to be accepted by you also in some
of the future births awaiting you.”

Although the hunter was very sinful, yet in association of a great devotee
like Narada, his mind became softened, and he was afraid of the sins. Those
who are grossly sinful are not afraid at all of committing sins; but here we can
see that because his purification began in the association of a great devotee like
Narada, he was afraid of his sinful activities.

The hunter therefore said, “My dear sir, from my childhood I have been
taught to kill animals like that. So would you kindly tell me how can I get
rid of all the offenses and sinful activities which I have committed? I am surrendering unto your feet. Please save me from all the reactions of my sinful
activities in the past, and just direct me in the proper path so that I can be free.”

Narada replied, “If you actually want to follow my direction, then I can
tell you the real path of being freed from these sinful reactions.”

The hunter agreed, and told Narada Muni, “Whatever you direct, I shall
follow without any hesitation.”

Narada then asked him to first break his bow, and then he would disclose
the path of liberation.

The hunter replied, “You are asking me to break my bow, but if I break
it then what will be the means of my living?”

Narada replied, “Don’t worry for your living. I shall send you sufficient
grains so that you can live.”

Thereupon, the hunter broke his bow and fell down at the feet of Narada.
Narada got him to stand up, and instructed him: “Just go to your home and
whatever money and valuables you have there, distribute amongst the devotees
and Brahmins, and just come out with me, wearing only one cloth. Construct
a small thatched house on the bank of the river, and sow the tulsi plant by the
house. Just circumambulate the tulsi tree, and every day taste one fallen leaf,
and always chant Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare
Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. So far as your living is concerned,
I shall send you the required grains. But you will only accept as much grain
as you require for yourself and your wife.”
Conclusion of Teachings to Sanatan Goswami 149

Narada then relieved the half-dead animals and, after getting free from
that dreadful condition, they fled away. By seeing the miracle executed by
Narada, the black hunter was struck with wonder, and after taking him to his
home, he again bowed down at his feet.

Narada returned to his place, and the hunter, after returning to his home,
began to execute the instructions which Narada had given him. In the meantime, the news spread among all the villages that the hunter had become a devotee, and therefore the residents of the villages came to see the new Vaishnava.
It is the custom of persons following the Vedic way of life to bring some grains
or some fruits whenever they go to see some saintly person. All the villagers
saw that the hunter now had turned into a great devotee, and they began to
bring eatables. So every day he was offered grains and fruit, so much that no
less than ten to twenty people might eat there. But, according to Narada’s
instruction, he did not accept anything more than what he required to live
on, for both himself and his wife.

After some days had passed, Narada said to his friend Parbut Muni: “I
have a disciple. Let us go and see him, and see if he is doing well.”

When the two great sages, Narada and Parbut, came to the place of the
hunter, and the hunter saw his Spiritual Master coming from the distance,
he began to go to him with great respect. But while he was going to receive
the great sages, there were ants on the field, and it was a hindrance to his passing. When he reached the sages, he wanted to bow down before them, but
he saw there were many ants and he slowly cleared away the ants with his
cloth. When Narada saw that the hunter was trying to save the lives of the ants
in such a way, it reminded him of a verse from the Skanda Purana. That
verse states: “Is it not wonderful for a devotee of the Lord, that he is not inclined to give any sort of pain, even to the ant?”

The purport is that, formerly, the hunter took pleasure by half-killing animals, but now that he had become a great devotee of the Lord, he was not
prepared to give pain even to an ant.

The hunter received the two great sages at his house, and he offered them
a sitting place, and brought water and washed their feet, and took water to them
for drinking, and both the husband and wife touched the water on their heads.
After this they began to feel ecstasy, and began to dance, singing Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare—raising their hands and dancing with their clothing flying.

When the two great sages saw the ecstasy of love of Godhead in the body
of the hunter, Parbut Muni addressed Narada: “You are a touchstone, and so
by your association even a great hunter has turned into a great devotee.”
150 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

There is a nice verse in the Skanda Purana which says: “My dear Devarsi
(Narada), you are glorious, and by your mercy even the lowest creature,
such as a hunter, also became elevated to such a state of devotion, and attained
transcendental attachment for Krishna.”

Narada then enquired of the hunter-devotee: “Are you getting your
foodstuff regularly ?”

The hunter replied, “You send so many people, and they bring so much
eatables that we both cannot eat so much.”

Narada replied, “That’s all right. Whatever you are getting, it is all right.
Now continue your devotional service in that way.” And after saying that,
both Narada and Parbut Muni disappeared from that place.

This recitation of the story of the hunter is offered by Lord Chaitanya to
show that even a hunter can be engaged in the devotional service of Krishna
by the influence of pure devotees.

He then said that another meaning of Atma is: all varieties of the Personality
of Godhead. Generally, the Personality of Godhead Himself, Krishna, and His
different expansions, are all known as the Personality of Godhead. So anyone
who is engaged in the devotional service of any Form or extension of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is also called Atmarama, and all such devotees
engage themselves either in the regulative principles of devotional service,
or in devotional service in transcendental love.

These two kinds of devotees also are divided into three categories: the
associates, those in the perfection of devotional service, and those newlyengaged in devotional service. Newly engaged devotees can be divided into
two: ones who have already attained an attachment for the Lord, and others
who have not attained such attachment for the Lord. And, according to the
two divisions of devotional service, namely the regulative principles and attachment by transcendental love, all these four classes of devotees become eight
in number. By following the regulative principles of devotion, the perfect
associates of the Lord are divided further into four classes: the servants, the
friends, the parental superiors, and the fiancees.

Just as devotees are sometimes perfected by devotional service, so some of
them are eternally perfect. In the regulative principle of devotional service,
according to the advanced standard and the beginner’s standard, there are sixteen kinds of devotees in transcendental loving service of the Lord. Therefore,
such Atmaramas can be considered to exist in 32 divisions. If you apply the
words Muni, Nirgrantha, Cha and Api in the 32 classes, then it becomes a description of 58 different types of devotees. All these devotees can be sheltered
Conclusion of Teachings to Sanatan Goswami ISI

by one word: Atmarama. Just as in the forest, there may be different kinds of
trees, but only by saying that there are trees there, the meaning is understood.

Thus the Lord completed 60 different meanings of the word Atmarama.
And then He again said that Atma means “the living entity, beginning from
the first living creature, Brahma, down to the ant.” He cited a verse from
Vishnu Purana, Sixth Chapter, in which it is stated that the energies of the Lord
are all spiritual. Of them, the energy which is known as the source of the living
entity is also spiritual, but the other energy, which is full of ignorance and is
manifested in material activities, is called material Nature. The living entities
are innumerable, even in the material creation, and if by chance one of them
or some of them can get the association of a pure devotee, then they can be
engaged in the pure devotional service of Krishna. The Lord said, “Formerly
I thought of 60 different meanings for the word Atmarama, but here another
meaning came to My mind by your association.”

Sanatan Goswami, after hearing from the Lord about different meanings
of the word Atmarama, was struck with wonder and fell down in devotion
at the feet of Lord Chaitanya. He said, “I understand that You are Personally
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna, and with Your breathing there
are many manifestations of the Vedic literature. You are the Teacher of Srimad
Bhagwatam, so You know best the meanings of the verses of Srimad Bhagwatam.
It is not possible for others to understand the confidential meanings of Srimad
Bhagwatam without Your mercy.”

The Lord then replied to Sanatan Goswami, “Do not try to eulogize
Me in that way. Just try to understand the real nature of Srimad Bhagwatam:
Srimad Bhagwatam is the sound representation of the Supreme Lord Krishna:
therefore, Srimad Bhagwatam is not different from Krishna. So, as Krishna is
unlimited, similarly, in each word and each letter of Srimad Bhagwatam, there
are unlimited meanings, and one can understand them by association of devotees. Don't, then, say that Bhagwatam is a collection of answers to questions.”

There were six questions put by the sages of Nayamisharanya to Sukadeva
Goswami, and Sukadeva Goswami explained or answered the six questions
in the Srimad Bhagwatam. There is a verse in the Vedic literature in which Lord
Shiva says, “So far as Bhagwatam is concerned, I may know or Sukadeva may
know or Vyasadeva may know It or not know It—but actually Bhagwatam
is to be understood by devotional service, and from a devotee, and not by
one’s own intelligence or by learned comments.”

The sages of Nayamisharanya asked, “My dear sir, kindly tell us now,
after the departure of the Lord for His own Abode, if the principles of religion
1§2 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

have gone with Him. How can we find such principles after His departure?”

The reply was as follows: “After the departure of Krishna to His Abode
with all religious principles, His representation, the Srimad Bhagwatam, the
Maha Purana, stands as the blazing, illuminating sun.”

The Lord then said, “I am just like a madman, to describe this verse of
Atmarama in so many ways; so you must not mind if I have said something
mad. But if somebody becomes a madman like Me, he can understand the real
meaning of Srimad Bhagwatam as I have explained it.”

Then Sanatan Goswami, with folded hands, fell down at the feet of Lord
Chaitanya and prayed as follows: “My dear Lord, You have asked me to prepare the regulative principles of devotional service, but I belong to the lowest
caste. I have no knowledge. I do not know how such an important task can be
finished my me. If You will kindly give me some hints about the preparation
of such a book on devotional service, then it may be that I shall be qualified
to write such a book.”

The Lord then blessed him, saying, “Whatever you write, by the grace
of Krishna, everything will come out of your heart to be accepted as you
have asked. I'll give you some notes that you can take down: The first and foremost thing is that one should accept a bona fide Spiritual Master. That is the
beginning of spiritual life.”

After indicating that one should begin by accepting a Spiritual Master,
He requested Sanatan Goswami to write the symptoms of a true Guru, and the
symptoms of a true devotee. The symptoms of a devotee are described in the
Padma Purana: A person who is a qualified Brahmin, and at the same time qualified with all the symptoms of a devotee, can become the Spiritual Master of
all classes of men, and such a devotee and Spiritual Master must be respected
as God Himself. But a person, even though he may be born of a very respectful
Brahmin family, cannot become a bona fide Spiritual Master if he is not a
devotee of the Lord. One should not, therefore, be misguided to think that a
bona fide Spiritual Master is required to be born of a so-called Brahmin family.
The idea is that a Spiritual Master must be a qualified Brahmin—by the symptoms of his activities.

This is confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam when Narada speaks of the different symptoms of the different divisions of social life, and when he summarizes that Brahmins and Kshatriyas and Sudras should be selected by their
particular individual qualificational symptoms. And Sridhar Swami _ has
noted, in his comment, that birth in the family of a Brahmin does not mean
that one is a Brahmin—he must be qualified with the symptoms of a Brahmin,
Conclusion of Teachings to Sanatan Goswami 153

as they are described in the Shastras. Practically, also, we have experience
that there are many devotees in the disciplic succession of the Gaudiya Vishnu
Sampradaya, such as the two great acharyas Thakur Narottam and Shyamananda Goswami, who were not born in Brahmin families, but were accepted
as Spiritual Masters by many Brahmins of fame, such as Ganganarayana Ramakrishna.

In this way, there are symptoms of the prospective devotee; and both
the disciple and the Spiritual Master must each see whether the other is eligible
to become a bona fide Spiritual Master or a bona fide student of the Spiritual
Master. Then one should know that the worshippable object is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and all kinds of different Mantras, sacred songs,
should be understood.

The Lord also instructed that Sanatan should describe the symptoms of
persons who are eligible to accept the Mantra, and how the Mantras should
be understood and perfected by ritualistic performances. Then He described
initiation, morning duties, and duties of cleanliness—washing the face, washing
the teeth—working, and prayers both in the morning and in the evening;
how to worship the Spiritual Master, how to mark the body with Gopichandan, how to collect the tulsi leaves, how to wash the room and the temple
of the Lord, and how to awaken Krishna from His sleeping. He described different methods for worshipping the Lord, which is called the method of fivefold paraphernalia and fifty-fold paraphernalia. How to worship the Lord
by five times offering worship and Aruti; how to offer foodstuff to Krishna,
how to lay Him down on the bed. There are different symptoms of the Form
of the Lord and Salagram Seela, such as the effect of going to holy places where
there are different temples of the Lord, and seeing the Form of God in the temples. There is the glorifying of the transcendental Name of the Lord, and the
different offences in the matter of worshipping. When worshipping the Lord
there are other things: paraphernalia such as the conch shell, water, and fragrant flowers; prayers and hymns, circumambulation, offering obeisances,
regulative principles of Puroscharam, and accepting Krishna Prasadam, rejecting
foodstuff which is not offered to Krishna, and not indulging in defaming a
devotee who has the actual symptoms of a devotee.

There are also symptoms of a holy man, the process of satisfying the sage,
and rejecting the society of undesirable persons; and hearing Srimad Bhagwatam constantly. Also to be followed are duties of the day, duties of the fortnight, and observing fasting en Ekadasee day; the duties of the month, observing
ceremonies like the birthday of the Lord, the three specific dates of fasting,
154 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Ekadasee, Janmastami, Vamanadvadasi, Sri Ramanavami and Nrishingha
Chaturdasi. And, in observing such fasting days, there is the consideration of
Beeddhaa, or overlapping of fasting days with other situations of the month, and
how they are helpful in the advancement of devotional service. Lord Chaitanya
instructed Sanatan Goswami that in every step he should give documentary
evidence from the Puranas. Also mentioned is how to establish the temples of
the Lord, and the general behavior and symptoms of a Vaishnava, and the
duties and occupation of the Vaishnava. Thus the Lord in summary explained
all the details of writing books on Vaishnava regulative principles.

Sanatan Goswami was a great devotee of the Lord, and was directly instructed to spread the cult of Bhakti by writing many books. There is a description of him in Chaitanya Chandrodaya, where it is said that Sanatan Goswami
was one of the ministers of the Nawab Hussein government; in fact, he was the
most important personality in the government. His brother, Rupa Goswami,
was also a minister in the government, and both of them gave up the lucrative
government service and became mendicants to serve the Supreme Lord.
Within their hearts they are full of transcendental loving service, but externally
they are just like ordinary mendicants, with a great liking for the cowherd
boy of Vrindaban. Sanatan Goswami was very dear to all pure devotees of
his time.
TEACHINGS OF LORD CHAITANYA

 
 
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

 

Lord Chaitanya, The Original
Personality of Godhead

Following in the footsteps of Kaviraj Krishnadas Goswami, we may offer our
respectful obeisances unto the Lotus Feet of Lord Chaitanya.

He is described as follows: Lord Chaitanya is the only shelter for the forlorn,
or the most fallen, and He is the only hope for persons who are completely
devoid of spiritual knowledge. Let us try to discuss His great contribution of
devotional service.

The Supremely Powerful Lord Krishna becomes manifest in five different potentialities. Although He is One without any second, still, for serving
five different specific spiritual purposes, He is manifested in five. Such diversity
is eternal and blissful, as opposed to the conception of montonous oneness.
From the version of Vedic literature, we can understand that the Absolute
Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, eternally exists with His diverse
energies. Lord Chaitanya appeared with full diverse energies, and they are
five in number; and, therefore, He is said to be Krishna with diverse energies,
presented as Lord Chaitanya.

1$7
158 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

As there is no difference between the energy and the energetic, so it is in
the Lord’s appearance as Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and His four Associates,
Nityananda Prabhu, Adwaita Prabhu, Gadadhara, and Srivas. Among these
five diverse manifestations of the Supreme Lord as incarnation, expansion and
energies there is no spiritual difference. They are five in One Absolute Truth.
For relishing transcendental flavors in the Absolute Truth they are five
diverse manifestations, and they are called the Form of a devotee, the identity
of a devotee, and pure devotional service personified.

Out of these five diversities of the Absolute Truth, the Form of Lord
Chaitanya is the Original Personality of Godhead, Krishna. The identity of
Krishna as Lord Nityananda is as the manifestation of the first expansion of the
Supreme Lord. And, similarly, Adwaita Prabhu is an incarnation of the
Supreme Lord. All these three belong to the category of Vishnu Tattwa, or
the Supreme Absolute Truth. Srivas is the representation of a pure devotee,
and Gadadhara is the representation of the internal energy of the Lord for
advancement in the cause of pure devotion. Therefore Gadadhara and Srivas,
although within the category of Vishnu, are diverse energies of the Supreme
Lord. In other words, they are not different from the energetic, but, still,
fer relishing transcendental relationships, they are manifested diversely. The
whole process of devotional service is transcendental reciprocation of the
flavors of relationship between the worshipped and the worshipper. Without
such a diverse exchange of transcendental flavors, devotional service has no
meaning.

In the Vedic literature (Katho Upanishad) there is a verse which says that
the Supreme Lord is the Supreme Living Entity amongst all living entities.
There are innumerable living entities, but there is One Living Entity Who
is the Supreme Absolute Godhead. The difference between that Singular Living
Entity and the plural number of living entities is that the Singular Living
Entity is the Lord of all. Lord Chaitanya is that Supreme Living Entity, Who
descended Himself for claiming the fallen innumerable living entities. In other
words, the specific purpose of Lord Chaitanya’s advent in recent ages was to
establish the Vedic fact that there is One Supreme Personality of Godhead
predominating over, or maintaining, the numerous personalities of living
entities. The Mayavadi, impersonalist, philosophers cannot understand this,
and therefore Lord Chaitanya advented Himself, to convince the people in
general about the real nature of the relationship between the Supreme and the
many entities.

In the Bhagavad Gita, the last instruction of Lord Krishna is that everyone
Lord Chaitanya, The Original Personality of Godhead 159

should give up all other engagements and should engage in the devotional
service of the Lord. But after His disappearance, persons with less intelligence
misunderstood Him. They became contaminated with the Mayavadi philosophy, which produced so many mental speculators that people became
misled about the actual position of the Absolute Truth and the living entity.
Lord Chaitanya, therefore, although the Supreme Lord Krishna Himself,
again appeared to teach the fallen souls of this material world how to approach
Lord Krishna. The philosophy of Bhagavad Gita is that one should give up
everything and be done with this world of material attachment. A pure
devotee of Lord Krishna and one who follows the philosophy of Lord Chaitanya are the same. Chaitanya’s philosophy is: one should give up everything
and worship God, Krishna. The difference is that Krishna, as the Supreme
Lord, the personality of Godhead, spoke the same words indicating Himself,
and the Mayavadi philosophers misunderstood Him. Therefore, Lord Chaitanya indicated the same thing: one should not declare himself to be as good
as Krishna, but should worship Krishna as the Supreme Lord.

It is a great mistake if we accept Lord Chaitanya as one of the conditioned
souls; He is to be understood as the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality
of Godhead, Sri Krishna Himself, In the Chaitanya Charitamrita, therefore,
it is said of Lord Chaitanya: “Krishna is now present in His five diverse manifestations,” as is being explained here. Unless one is in uncontaminated goodness, it is very difficult to understand Lord Chaitanya as the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. Therefore, to understand Lord Chaitanya one
has to follow the direct disciples of Lord Chaitanya, the six Goswamis, and
especially the path chalked out by Srila Jiva Goswami.

The most astonishing factor is that Lord Chaitanya, although the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krishna, never exhibited Himself as Krishna. Rather,
whenever He was detected by intelligent devotees as Lord Krishna, and addressed as Lord Krishna, He denied it, and sometimes He closed His ears,
protesting that one should not be addressed as the Supreme Lord. This was
His indirect teaching to the Mayavadi philosophers: that one should never
pose oneself as the Supreme Lord falsely, and thereby misdirect the followers.
The followers also should not be foolish enough to accept anyone and everyone
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without testing with the Scriptures
and by activities. One should not, however, mistake Lord Chaitanya with
His five diverse manifestations as ordinary human beings. He is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krishna Himself. The beauty of Lord Chaitanya is
that, although He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, He Him160 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

self as a great devotee is teaching all the conditioned souls how devotional
service should be conducted. The conditioned souls who are interested in
devotional service should follow, therefore in the exemplary footsteps of
Lord Chaitanya, to learn how Krishna can be achieved by devotional service.
In other words, the Supreme Lord Himself teaches the conditioned soul
how He should be approached by devotional service.

By analytical study of the five diverse manifestations of the Supreme
Lord we can know that Lord Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is the Supreme
Absolute, and that Lord Nityananda is an immediate expansion of the Supreme
Absolute Truth. We can understand that Adwaita Prabhu is also in the category
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but he is the subordinate to Lord
Chaitanya and Nityananda Prabhu. The Supreme Personality of Godhead and
His immediate subordinate expansions are all worshippable by the other two,
namely, the internal potential representation, and the marginal potential
representation.

The internal potential representation, Gadadhara, represents the pure
devotee, and the marginal potential representation is a confidential devotee.
Both these categories are worshippers of the other three categories, but all
of them—the two worshippable categories and the two in the worshipper
category—are engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.

There is a specific difference between the pure devotee and the confidential
devotee. Different potencies of the Lord are engaged in serving the Supreme
Lord in different transcendental relationships. They are situated in conjugal
love, in parental affection, in friendly affinity and in obedient servitude. By
impartial judgement, it is found that the internal potencies of the Supreme
Lord, engaged in conjugal love with Him, are the best of all devotees. As
such, both internal devotees and confidential devotees are attracted by the
conjugal love of the Supreme Absolute Truth, and are the most confidential
devotees of Lord Chaitanya. Other pure devotees, who are more or less
attached to Sri Nityananda Prabhu and to Adwaita Prabhu, are attracted by
other transcendental relationships, such as parental affection, friendly affinity
and obedient servitude. When such devotees are very much attached to the
activities of Lord Chaitanya, at once they become confidential devotees in
conjugal love with the Supreme Lord.

There is a very nice song sung by a great devotee and Acharya in the disciplic succession from Lord Chaitanya. His name is Sri Thakur Narottamdas.
Sri Thakur says as follows: “When will there be a transcendental vibration
Lord Chaitanya, The Original Personality of Godhead 161

all over my body simply by attending to the Name of Gauranga? When will
there be incessant flowing of my tears simply by uttering Harer Nama of the
Lord? When will Lord Nityananda be merciful upon me, and all my desires
for material enjoyment become insignificant? When shall I be purified by
giving up all contaminations of material enjoyment; and when shall I be able
to see the transcendental Abode, Vrindaban? When shall I be eager to accept
the six Goswamis as my prime guidance? And when shall I be able to understand the conjugal love of Krishna?” In other words, nobody should be eager
to understand the conjugal love of Krishna without undergoing disciplinary
training under the six Goswamis of Vrindaban.

The Samkirtan movement inaugurated by Lord Chaitanya is a transcendental
Pastime of the Lord: “So that I may live simultaneously to preach and popularize this movement in the material world.” And in that Samkirtan movement
of Lord Chaitanya, Nityananda and Adwaita are His expansions, and Gadadhara and Srivas are His internal and marginal potencies.

The living entities are called marginal potency because they have, potentially, both attitudes, namely the tendency to surrender unto Krishna, and the
tendency for becoming independent of the Supreme Lord, and being contaminated by the material world through the propensity for material enjoyment. When a living entity is predominated over by the desire for material
enjoyment and becomes entangled in material contamination, at that time he
is subjected to the three-fold miseries of material existence. There is a very
nice example in this connection. It is just like a seed sewn in the earth. If it
is overpowered by too much water, there is no possibility of the seed being
fructified. Similarly, even if a man is captivated by material enjoyment,
and even if the seed of such enjoyment is within the heart of the conditioned
soul but he is overwhelmed, over powered by a flood of transcendental
activities in love of God, then his potential seed cannot fructify into a conditional life of material existence. The conditional living entities in the material
world, especially at the present age of Kali, are being overpowered by the
flood of love of God inaugurated by Lord Chaitanya and His Associates.

There is a nice verse in this connection, written by His Holiness Prabodhananda Saraswati in his book Sri Chaitanya Chandramrita. In that verse it is
stated that materialistic persons are very enthusiastic in the matter of maintaining
their family: members, wife and children; and there are many mystic speculators who are engaged in speculating on being liberated from the miseries of
material life, and therefore they undergo various kinds of austerities and
penances. But persons who have discovered the greatest transcendental flavor,
162 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

in the movement of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, no longer have any taste
for all those activities.

Persons who are under the impression that, in the Form of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and in the matter of His devotional service, there is
material contamination, are called Mayavadi. According to their imperfect
speculation, the impersonal Brahman is considered the only existence of the
cosmic manifestation. As soon as there is a conception of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they consider that it is in contact with Maya, or the
external material energy. Similarly, such persons consider all incarnations of
the Supreme Lord to be contaminated by this material Nature. According to
them, this material body of the living entity, and the action of matter on all
the different kinds of identifications of the living entity, are called material
manifestation. According to them, liberation means that there is no longer
any individual identification, or pure living entity. In other words, a living
entity, when he is liberated, becomes One with the Supreme Impersonal
Brahman.

According to Mayavadi philosophy it is understood that, in the Personality
of Godhead, in the Abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and in the
matter of devotional service, the emotional devotees are all under the spell
of Maya, and are therefore subjected to the material condition. Persons who
forget the transcendental nature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
His transcendental Abode and devotional service, as well as the devotee, consider that these are different examples of material activity. Such persons are
called Karmis, or actors in fruitive activities. When one thinks that there is a
possibility of arguing about transcendence, he is called agnostic. And when
one thinks that there is the possibility to criticize transcendence, he is called
atheist. Lord Chaitanya wanted to accept all these different kinds of agnostics,
atheists, skeptics, and unfaithfuls, and swallow them in the flood of love of
God. Therefore, He accepted the four orders of life—and He accepted the
renounced order of life, in order to attract all these forces.

Lord Chaitanya remained a householder until twenty-four only, and in
the twenty-fifth year of His life, He accepted the renounced order. After
accepting the renounced order, He attracted many other renounced order
Sannyasis. During the time that He had been executing the Samkirtan movement in His family, many Mayavadi Sannyasis did not take His movement
very seriously. Similarly, the speculative students, atheists, and those who
are attached to fruitive activities and unnecessary criticism were also delivered
by the Lord after He accepted the Sannyasi order of life. The Lord was so
Lord Chaitanya, The Original Personality of Godhead 163

kind that He accepted all of them, and delivered to them the most important
factor of life: love of God.

To fulfill the mission of the Lord, bestowing love of God upon the conditioned souls, He devised many methods to accept all those disinterested in
the matter of love of God. After He accepted the renounced order, all agnostics
and critics, atheists and mental speculators became the students and followers
of Lord Chaitanya. Even many of those who were not Hindus or the followers
of the Vedic principles of life also accepted Lord Chaitanya as the Supreme
Teacher.

Those Sannyasis who were known as the Mayavadi philosophers of
Benares were the only persons who avoided the mercy of Sri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu. The plight of the Mayavadi philosophers is described as follows
by Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Goswami: “The Mayavadi philosophers of
Benares are less intelligent because they want to measure everything by direct
perception. But everything they have is a calculation of material perception.
The Absolute Truth is transcendence, but according to them there is no
variegatedness in transcendence, because they say that anything which is full
of variegatedness is Maya.”

During Chaitanya Mahaprabhu’s time there were other philosophers,
known as the Mayavadi philosophers of Sarnatha. Sarnatha is a place near
Benares where Buddhist philosophers were residing, and even today there
are many Stupas of the Buddhist Mayavadi. The Mayavadi philosophers of
Sarnatha are different from the impersonalists who believe in the impersonal
manifestation of Brahman. According to the Sarnatha philosophers there is
no spiritual existence. Spiritually, both the Mayavadi philosophers of Benares
and the philosophers of Sarnatha are entrapped by the material Nature. None
of them actually knows the nature of the Absolute Transcendence. The philosophers of Benares, although accepting the Vedic principles superficially
and accepting themselves as transcendentalists, do not agree to accept spiritual
variegatedness. They have no information about devotional service, and therefore they are called “non-devotees,” or against the devotional service of Lord
Krishna.

The impersonalists speculate on the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and His devotees, subjected to the direct perception of knowledge. The Lord
and His devotee and His devotional service, however, are not subject to
direct perception. In other words, spiritual variegatedness is unknown to the
Mayavadi philosophy, and therefore all the Mayavadi philosophers and

Sannyasis began to criticize Him because He was conducting the Samkirtan
164 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

movement. They were surprised to see Lord Chaitanya, because He belonged
to the Mayavadi sect of Sannyasis, having accepted His Sannyasa order from
Keshav Bharati, who belonged to the Mayavadi school. They were surprised
to see Him engaged in chanting and dancing, and not engaged in the matter
of hearing or reading Vedanta, as is the custom. The Mayavadi philosophers
are very fond of Vedanta, and misinterpret it in their own way. The Mayavadi
Sannyasis, instead of understanding their own position, began to critize Lord
Chaitanya as an unauthorized Sannyasi. They criticized that He was sentimental
and not actually a bona fide Sannyasi. All these criticisms were carried to Lord
Chaitanya when He was at Benares, and He was not at all surprised. He smiled
when the news was carried to Him. He, however, did not associate with the
Mayavadi Sannyasis, but used to remain alone and execute His own mission.
And after staying for some days in Benares, He started for Mathura.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

   

i
if

\ \\ |! I ; | IM, ,

The Conversations With

Prakasananda

According to the principles of the Mayavadi Sannyasis, singing, dancing,
and playing on musical instruments are strictly prohibited; they are called
three kinds of sinful activities. The Mayavadi Sannyasi is supposed to engage
his valuable time simply in the matter of Vedanta study. When the Mayavadi
Sannyasis in Benares saw that Lord Chaitanya was indulging in singing,
dancing and playing musical instruments, and was always chanting Hare
Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama,
Rama Rama, Hare Hare, they concluded that this Sannyasi was not educated,
and, out of sentiment, He was misleading some of the followers. Sankaracharya
has said that a Sannyasi should always be engaged in studying Vedanta, and
should be satisfied simply having one cloth and nothing more. Lord Chaitanya
was neither studying Vedanta in formality, nor did He cease from singing
and dancing, and so He was criticized by all the Sannyasis at Benares, as well
as by their householder followers.

Lord Chaitanya got this news from His students and disciples, and when

165
166 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

He heard that they were all criticizing Him, He simply smiled and started
for Mathura and Vrindaban. But He came back again to Benares on His way
to Jagannath Puri from Mathura. When He came back to Benares, He stayed
at the house of Chandra Sekhar, who was considered a Sudra because he was
a clerk. In spite of Sekhar being a Sudra, Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu made
His residential quarter at his place. Lord Chaitanya made no such distinction
between Brahmin or Sudra—anyone devoted, He accepted. Customarily,
a Sannyasi is supposed to take shelter in the house of a Brahmin, or eat at the
house of a Brahmin, but Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, as the independent Supreme
Personality of Godhead, had His own discretion, and He decided to stay at
Chandra Sekhar’s house.

In those days, by misuse of the Brahminical hereditary principle, the
Brahmins made it a law that anyone who was not born of a Brahmin family
was a Sudra. So even the Kshatriyas and the Vaidyas were also called Sudras.
Vaidyas are supposed to be descendents of Brahmin fathers and Sudra wives,
and therefore they are sometimes called Sudras. So Chandra Sekhar Acharya,
although born of a Vaidya family, was called, at Benares, a Sudra. As long
as Lord Chaitanya stayed at Benares, He stayed at Chandra Sekhar’s apartment,
and He used to take His food at the place of Tapan Mishra.

When Sanatan Goswami met Lord Chaitanya at Benares he learned from
Lord Chaitanya the process and principles of devotional service during two
months of continuous teaching. The instructions of Lord Chaitanya to Sanatan
Goswami have been described in our First Part of Lord Chaitanya’s teachings.
After that teaching, Sanatan Goswami was authorized to propagate the principles of devotional service and the Srimad Bhagwatam. But, during this time,
both Tapan Mishra and Chandra Sekhar Acharya were feeling very sorry
about strong criticism against Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, and they came
together and prayed for the Lord to meet the Mayavadi Sannyasis.

They informed Lord Chaitanya: “We have been mortified by hearing
unfavorable criticism from the Mayavadi Sannyasis against You. It has become
intolerable for us.” They requested He do something so that these criticisms
would be stopped.

While they were thus discussing the criticism of the Mayavadi Sannyasis,
a Brahmin came to Lord Chaitanya and invited Him, as he had invited all
the other Sannyasis, to his place. Only Chaitanya had not been invited, and
so he now had come to invite Him. He knew that Chaitanya Mahaprabhu did
not mix with the Mayavadi Sannyasis, and therefore he fell down at Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu’s feet and implored Him: “Although I know that You do not
ane 0 ed “s sill >
—— i . aul = ' = = ‘i i
2 > S& a be = wa

NG bed . : ZZ Ve weg NW = 7 , al a

 

Lord Chaitanya Meets Prakasananda Saraswati at Benares
The Conversations With Prakasananda 167

accept invitations, still, it is my request—please come and take Prasadam at
my place with the other Sannyasis. If You accept this invitation it will be considered a special favor to me.”

The Lord took this opportunity and accepted the invitation of the Brahmin,
in order to meet the Mayavadi Sannyasis. It was, practically, an arrangement
made by the Lord Himself. The Brahmin who invited Him knew that Lord
Chaitanya did not accept any invitations, but still he was very eager to invite
Him.

The next day Lord Chaitanya went to the house of the Brahmin. He
saw that all the Mayavadi Sannyasis were sitting there. He offered His respects
to all the Sannyasis, as was usual, and then He went to wash His Feet. After
washing His Feet, He sat down at that spot, not amongst the Mayavadi Sannyasis, but in a place where water was kept for washing the feet. While He
was sitting there, the other Sannyasis saw a glaring effulgence emanating from
His body. All the Mayavadi Sannyasis were attracted by this glaring effulgence,
and they stood up and showed Him respects. Amongst them there was one
Sannyasi whose name was Prakasananda Saraswati. He was the chief amongst
all the impersonalist Sannyasis, and he addressed Lord Chaitanya with great
humility, and asked Him to come and sit amongst them.

He said, “My dear sir, why are You sitting in that filthy place? Please
come and sit with us.”

Lord Chaitanya replied: “Oh, I belong to an inferior sect of Sannyasis.
Therefore I think I should not sit with you. Let Me sit down here.”

Prakasananda Saraswati was surprised to hear such a thing from such a
learned man, and he actually took His hand and requested Him to please come
and sit down with him. Lord Chaitanya was seated, and Prakasananda
Saraswati enquired, “I think Your name is Sri Krishna Chaitanya, and I understand that You belong to our Mayavadi sect because You have taken Your
Sannyasa from Keshav Bharati, who belongs to the Sankara Sampradaya.”

According to the Sankara sect, there are ten different names for Sannyasi.
Out of them, the three names, Tirtha, Asram and Saraswati, are considered
to be the most enlightened and cultured among the Sannyasis. Lord Chaitanya
was a Vaishnava, and therefore naturally He was humble and meek, and
He wanted to give the better place to Prakasananda, who belonged to the
Saraswati Sampradaya. According to Sankara principles, a disciple of the
Bharatic school is called Chaitanya. But Sri Krishna Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
although He took Sannyasa, kept His Brahmachary name, without the title
Bharati.
168 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Prakasananada Saraswati inquired from Lord Chaitanya: “Well sir, You
belong to our Sankara sect, and You are living at Benares. Why don't
You mix with us? What is the reason? Another thing—You are a Sannyasi.
You are supposed to engage Your time simply in Vedanta study. But we see
that instead of doing that You are always engaged in chanting, dancing, and
playing on musical instruments. What are the reasons? These things are done
by emotional and sentimental people. But You are a qualified Sannyasi. Why
should You not engage Yourself in the study of Vedanta? By Your effulgence
it appears to us that You are just like the Supreme Narayana, the Personality
of Godhead, but Your behavior appears to be otherwise. So we are inquisitive
to know, what are the reasons?”

Lord Chaitanya replied: “My dear sir, I may inform you that My Spiritual
Master saw Me as a great fool, and therefore he more or less punished Me
and said that, because I am such a fool, I have no jurisdiction in the study of
Vedanta. So he kindly gave Me the chanting of Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna,
Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
My Spiritual Master told Me: “You go on Chanting this Krishna Mantra, and
it will make You all-perfect.””

Actually, Lord Chaitanya was neither a fool nor ignorant of the principles
of Vedanta, but His purpose was to demonstrate to modern society that for
fools who have no penance and austerity behind them, and simply for some
recreational purpose want to study Vedanta—that is not recommended. In
His Sikshastak, Lord Chaitanya said that one should be in a humble state of
mind, should think of himself as lower than the grass on the street, more tolerant
than the tree, devoid of all false sense of prestige, and ready to offer all kinds
of respects to others. In such a state of mind, one can chant Vedanta philosophy
or the Holy Name of God constantly. He also wanted to teach that a serious
student of transcendental science should follow exactly the words of the Spiritual Master. According to the calculation of the Spiritual Master, Lord Chaitanya appeared to be a fool, so he said that He should not indulge in the study
of Vedanta but should go on chanting the Krishna Mantra. Therefore, He
strictly obeyed. In other words Lord Chaitanya impressed on the Mayavadis
that the words of a bona fide Spiritual Master must be strictly followed. That
would make one perfect in all respects.

Vedanta means that the last word of the Vedic knowledge is to understand
Krishna: Vedaischa sarvai aham eva vedyam: Actual understanding of the Vedanta
is to know Krishna, and our relationship with Krishna. And one who understands Krishna understands everything. The knower of Krishna is always
The Conversations With Prakasananda 169

engaged in the transcendental loving service of Krishna. The Lord confirms
this in Bhagavad Gita: ‘Iam the Source of everything, and everything emanates
from Me. Therefore, one who knows Me perfectly well is fully engaged in
My transcendental loving service.” A living entity is eternally related with
Krishna by that relationship of Master and servant, and once that service is
wanting—or, in other words, when one is not situated in Krishna Consciousness—it is to be understood that his study of Vedanta is insufficient. When one
does not understand what is Krishna Consciousness, or is not engaged in
the trascendental loving service of Lord Krishna, it is to be understood that
he is adverse to the study of Vedanta or understanding the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.

The path shown by Lord Chaitanya in the matter of studying Vedanta
philosophy, as explained in this connection, should be followed by all. A
person who is puffed up over his so-called education, has no humility and
therefore does not seek after the protection of a bona fide Spiritual Master,
thinks that he does not require a bona fide Spiritual Master, and, rather by his
own effort, he can achieve the highest perfection. Such persons are not eligible
for the study of Vedanta Sutra. Those who are under the spell of the material
energy, instead of following the instructions of the disciplic succession, try
to manufacture something of their own, and thereby step outside the sphere
of Vedanta study. A bona fide Spiritual Master must always condemn such
independent mental speculators. If the bona fide Spiritual Master directly
points out the foolishness of a disciple, that should not be taken otherwise.
In other words, a person who is completely innocent in the Science of God
is actually not learned. And, more or less, everyone who is not in Krishna
Consciousness is subject to that foolishness.

Sometimes we display our foolishness by accepting somebody who is
barely even educated as our Spiritual Master. That is another sign of our
foolishness. It is our duty to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Whose Lotus Feet are worshipped by all the Vedas. One who does not understand that Supreme Personality of Godhead, and is proud of his false understanding of Vedanta, is actually a fool. Mundane attempts at academic knowledge are another foolishness. So long as one cannot understand the cosmic
manifestation as a representation of the three modes of material Nature, one
must be considered in the darkness of inebriety and caught in the duality of
this material world. Actually, a person who is in perfect knowledge of the
Vedanta becomes a servitor of the Supreme Lord, Who is the Maintainer and
Sustainer of the whole cosmic manifestation. So long as one is not transcen170 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

dental to the service of the limited, he cannot be a person with Vedanta knowledge.

So long as one is in the limited jurisdiction of fruitive activities, or involved
in mental speculation, he is perhaps eligible for studying or instructing on the
theoretical knowledge of Vedanta Sutra, but he cannot be on the platform of
understanding the Supreme, Eternal, transcendental (completely liberated)
vibration of Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare
Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. In other words, anyone who has
achieved his perfection in chanting the transcendental vibration Hare Krishna
does not have to learn separately the philosophy of Vedanta Sutra.

Persons who are not eligible by thorough understanding of the transcendental vibration as nondifferent from the Supreme, and who try to become
Mayavadi philosophers and expert in Vedanta Sutra, are all fools according to
the teaching of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, or the bona fide Spiritual Master.
To study Vedanta Sutra by the ascending process is another sign of foolishness.
On the other hand, he who has attained the taste for chanting the transcendental
vibration is actually situated at the conclusion of Vedanta. In this connection
there are two verses of Srimad Bhagwatam which are very instructive: The
purport of the first is that, even if a person is born in the family of the lowest
of human beings, but is engaged in chanting the transcendental vibration, then
it is to be understood that he has already performed all kinds of renunciation
and austerities, and has performed all kinds of sacrifices, and has studied all
the Brahma Sutras—so that he is now able to chant Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna,
Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
The purport of the second verse is that a person who is chanting the two syllables Ha-re (ray) must be considered as having studied all the Vedas: the Rig
Veda, Atharva Veda, Yaju Veda and Sama Veda.

On the other hand, there are many so-called devotees who think that
Vedanta is meant for a particular class of men, and is not meant for the devotees. They do not know that Vedanta is the only plaform of pure devotees.
All the great Acharyas of the four Sampradayas of the Vaishnava sect have
made their commentaries on the Vedanta Sutra, but the so-called devotee class,
who are known as Prakrita Sahajia, carefully avoid the study of Vedanta Sutra.
The Prakrita Sahajia misunderstand the pure devotees and Vaishnav Acharyas
as being mental speculators or fruitive actors. As a result of such a conclusion,
they themselves become Mayavadis, and leave the service of the Supreme
Lord.

Understanding the Vedanta Sutra by academic knowledge never qualifies
The Conversations With Prakasananda I7I

a man for understanding the value of the transcendental vibration. Such persons
who are entangled in academic knowledge are conditioned souls who are confused about the facts of I and My understanding. As such, they are unable to
detach their minds from the external energy.

When a person actually attains transcendental knowledge, he becomes
free from this duality and becomes engaged in transcendental loving service
of the Supreme Lord. The transcendental loving service of the Supreme Lord
is the only means for being detached from material activities. A person properly
initiated by a bona fide Spiritual Master, and engaged in chanting Hare Krishna,
Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare, gradually becomes freed from the conception of I and Mine, and
therefore becomes attached to the transcendental loving service, in one of the
five different transcendental relationships. Such transcendental service is not
subject matter for the gross and subtle bodies. When, however, one can
understand that there is no difference between the Supreme and His Name,
at that time only can he be situated in Krishna Consciousness. At that time he
has no longer any necessity for grammatical adjustment of the language.
Rather, he becomes more interested in the subject matter of the address:
Hare Krishna—O my Lord, O energy of the Lord, please engage me in Your
service !

Lord Chaitanya explained all this to Prakasananda Saraswati and told him
that He had heard it from His Spiritual Master in these words. He informed
Prakasananda Saraswati that His Spiritual Master had taught Him that the
actual commentary on the Vedanta Sutra is Srimad Bhagwatam, as it is stated
in the Srimad Bhagwatam by Vyasadeva, the Author of Vedanta Sutra.

The perfection of a student is to understand the identity of the Holy Name
and the Supreme Lord. And, without being under the shelter of such a realized
Spiritual Master, one’s understanding of the Supreme is simply foolishness.
One can, however, fully understand the transcendental by service and devo-~
tion. When Lord Chaitanya uttered Krishna without any offense, or when He
offenselessly chanted the Krishna Mantra, or Maha Mantra, He declared that
it can at once deliver a conditioned soul from the material contamination. In
this Age of Kali there is no other alternative to chanting this Maha Mantra.
It is stated that the essence of all Vedic literature is to chant this Holy Name of
Krishna: Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. He also said to Prakasananda Saraswati
that, in order to convince Me about this essential fact of Vedic knowledge,
he has taught Me a verse from Brihad Naradiya Puranam:
172 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Harer Nama Harer Nama Harer Nama Eva Kevalam. Kalau Nasteva Nasteva

Nasteva Gatir Anyatha.

“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy, the only means of deliverance is to
chant the Holy Name of the Lord—and there is no other means of
success.”

In three out of the four millenniums, namely the Satya Yuga, Treta Yuga
and Dvapara Yuga, there was honor in understanding transcendence through
the path of disciplic succession. In the present age, on account of Kali, people
have no interest in the matter of the disciplic succession, but they have invented
many paths of argument and logic. Such an ascending process of understanding
transcendence is not approved according to the Vedic way. The Absolute
Truth must descend from the Absolute platform. It is not to be understood
by the ascending process. The Holy Name of the Lord, Hare Krishna, Hare
Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare
is a transcendental vibration. Therefore it comes down from the transcendental platform, the Supreme Abode of Krishna. And, because there is no
difference between Krishna and His Name, therefore the Holy Name of
Krishna is as pure, as perfect, and as liberated as Krishna Himself. For understanding the transcendental nature of the Holy Name of God, the academic
scholars have no entrance by their logic and argument. The single path to
understanding the transcendental nature of Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna
Krishna, Hare Hare]/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, is to chant
these Names with faith and adherence. Such chanting will release one from the
designated conditions of gross and subtle bodies.

In this age of logical argument and disagreement the chanting of Hare
Krishna is the only means for self realization, and because this transcendental
vibration alone can deliver the conditioned soul, therefore it is the essence of
the Vedanta Sutra. In the material conception there may be duality and differences between the Name, Form, quality, emotion and activities of a person
and the person himself; but so far as this transcendental vibration is concerned,
there is no such limitation, because it descends from the Spiritual World.
In the Spiritual World there is no such difference between the Name of the
Person Whose Name is a Quality, and the Person of the Quality. There is
no such difference as there is in the material world. The Mayavadi philosophers
cannot understand this, and therefore they are not eligible to utter the transcendental vibration.

Lord Chaitanya then said to Prakasananda Saraswati that, because He
got that order from His Spiritual Master, therefore He was constantly engaged
The Conversations With Prakasananda 173

in chanting Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare
Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

“As a result of this chanting, sometimes I become impatient and cannot
restrain Myself from dancing and laughing or crying or singing—just like a
madman. When I first wondered whether I had become a madman by chanting
this Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare
Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, | approached My Spiritual Master and informed
him that by chanting this Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare
Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, ‘T am becoming just
like a madman, so what is my actual position?”

In the Narada Pancharatra it is stated that all the Vedic rituals and Mantras
and understanding are compressed into the eight words Hare Krishna, Hare
Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare. Similarly, in the Kalisantra Upanishad,
it is stated that Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare
Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare—these sixteen words—are especially
meant for counteracting the contamination of Kali. To save oneself from the
contamination of Kali there is no other alternative than these sixteen words.

Lord Chaitanya informed Prakasananda Saraswati that when His Spiritual
Master understood Him, the Spiritual Master said: “It is the transcendental
nature of the Holy Name of Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna,
Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare to transport a man
into spiritual madness. Anyone who sincerely chants this Holy Name is actually
elevated very soon onto the platform of love of God, and therefore he becomes
mad after Him. This madness of love of God is the first perfectional stage of
the human being.” Generally the human being is after religiousness, economic
development, sense gratification, and liberation. But this love of God is above
all such perfections of life, The process is that a bona fide Spiritual Master
chants the Holy Name, Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare
Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, and the transcendental
sound vibration enters into the ear of the disciple. If the disciple follows in the
footsteps of his Spiritual Master and chants the Holy Name with equal respect,
that becomes the worship of the transcendental Name.

When the transcendental Name becomes worshipped by the devotee, the
Name Himself spreads His Glories within the heart of the devotee, and when
he is perfectly qualified in chanting such transcendental vibration of the Holy
Name, he is quite fit to become a Spiritual Master for delivering all the people
of the world. The chanting of the Holy Name is so powerful that, gradually,
it establishes its supremacy above all in the world. And the devotee who chants
174 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

it becomes transcendentally situated in ecstasy, and sometimes he laughs and
cries:and dances in his ecstasy. Sometimes less intelligent persons put some
hindrances in the way of the chanting of Hare Krishna, or the Maha Mantra;
but one who is situated on the platform of love of Godhead chants the Holy
Name loudly for the benefit of all persons concerned. As a result of that,
everyone becomes initiated in chanting the Holy Name, Hare Krishna, Hare
Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare. By the chanting and hearing of the Holy Name of Krishna, a
person can remember the Forms and Qualities of Krishna.
CHAPTER NINETEEN

  

//
~ =
A

WNL

The Goal of Vedanta Study

The transcendental ecstatic attachment for Krishna by perfectly understanding that Krishna the Person and Krishna the Name are identical is called
Bhava. One who has achieved such Bhava is certainly not in the contamination
of material Nature. He actually enjoys transcendental pleasure from such Bhava.
And, when Bhava is more intensified, it is called love of Godhead. The Holy
Name of Krishna is called the Maha Mantra (Great Chanting): therefore
Lord Chaitanya explained to Prakasananda Saraswati that the Holy Name
of Krishna has a specific influence on anyone who chants It and he can attain
the stage of love of Godhead, or intensified Bhava. Such love of Godhead is
the ultimate goal of human necessity. When one compares this love of Godhead with the other necessities of the human society, namely, religiousness,
economic development, sense gratification, and liberation, they are seen as
most insignificant. When one is absorbed in temporary designative existence,
one hankers after sense gratification, or else after liberation. But love of
Godhead is the eternal nature of the soul; it is unchangeable, without begin
175
176 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

ning, and it has no end; therefore, temporary sense gratification or a desire
for liberation cannot compare with the transcendental nature of love of God.
This love of God is called the fifth dimension in the human goals of life. Compared with the ocean of love of transcendental pleasure, the impersonal Brahman conception cannot measure as even one drop of water.

Lord Chaitanya now explained that His Spiritual Master had confirmed
the ecstatic situation of His chanting the Holy Name of God, and had confirmed that the essence of all Vedic literature is the attainment of love of Godhead. His Spiritual Master said that Lord Chaitanya was fortunate enough to
have attained such a stage of love of Godhead. By attainment of such transcendental love of Godhead, one’s heart becomes very anxious to attain direct
contact with the Lord; and with that transcendental sentiment he sometimes
laughs, sometimes cries, sometimes sings, sometimes dances like a madman,
and sometimes he traverses hither and thither.

There are various ecstatic symptoms of the body: crying, changing the
color of the body, madness, bereavement, silence, feeling proud, ecstasy,
gentleness, and, often, the person in love of Godhead dances. Such dancing
puts him into the ocean of the nectar of love of Krishna.

Lord Chaitanya’s Spiritual Master said to Him: “It is very good that You
have attained such a perfectional stage of love of Godhead, and by Your
attainment I am very much obliged to You.”

The father becomes more enlightened when he sees his son advance beyond
himself. Similarly, when the Spiritual Master sees a disciple advancing, he
takes more pleasure in that than in his own advancement. Lord Chaitanya’s
Spiritual Master blessed Him, telling Him to “dance, sing and propagate this
Samkirtan movement, and by instructing people about Krishna, try to deliver
them from the nescience.”’

His Spiritual Master taught Him a very nice verse from Srimad Bhagwatam
which is from the Eleventh Canto, Second Chapter: “A person who is constantly engaged in devotional service to Krishna by chanting His Holy Name
becomes so transcendentally attached to the chanting that his heart becomes
softened without any extraneous endeavor. In such a condition of softened
heart he exhibits transcendental ecstasies, sometimes by laughing, sometimes
by crying, sometimes by singing, sometimes by dancing—not exactly in an
artistic way, but just like a madman.”

Lord Chaitanya informed Prakasananda Saraswati, “I have full faith
in my Spiritual Master’s words, and therefore I am always engaged in the matter
of chanting Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare
The Goal of Vedanta Study 177

Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. I do not know how I have become
just like a madman, but the Name Krishna Himself induces Me to become so.
I realize that the transcendental pleasure derived from chanting Hare Krishna,
Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare, is just like an ocean and, in comparison, all other pleasures, including the pleasure of the impersonal conception, are like shallow water in channels.”

It appears from the talks of Lord Chaitanya that a person who cannot keep
his faith in the words of the Spiritual Master and thus acts independently
cannot ever attain the desired success in the matter of chanting Hare Krishna.
In the Vedic literature it is said that, for one who has unflinching faith in the
Supreme Lord, and similar faith in his Spiritual Master, the import of the
transcendental literature becomes revealed. Lord Chaitanya firmly believed
in this statement of His Spiritual Master, and He never stopped His Samkirtan
movement by neglecting the instruction of His Spiritual Master. Therefore,
the transcendental potency of the Holy Name encouraged Him more and more
in chanting Hare Krishna, or the Maha Mantra.

Lord Chaitanya immediately informed Prakasananda that people in
general in the modern age are more or less bereft of all spiritual intellect.
When such persons come under the influence of Sankaracharya’s Mayavadi,
or impersonalist, philosophy before beginning the most confidential Vedanta
Sutras, their natural tendency toward obediance to the Supreme is checked.
The Supreme Source of everything is naturally respected by everyone, but
by the impersonalist conception of Sankara, this natural tendency is hampered.
Therefore, the Spiritual Master of Lord Chaitanya suggested that it is better not
to study the Sarirakabhasya of Sankaracharya, which is very harmful to people
in general. Neither has the common man the intelligence to penetrate into the
jugglery of words. He is better advised to chant the Maha Mantra: Hare Krishna,
Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare. In this quarrelsome Age of Kali, there is no alternative for self
realization to the chanting of the Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.

After hearing the arguments and talks of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, all the
the Mayavadi Sannyasis who were present became pacified, and replied in
sweet words: “My dear sir, whatever You have spoken is all true. A person
who attains love of Godhead is certainly very fortunate. And undoubtedly
You are very fortunate that You have attained such a stage of love of Godhead.
But what is the fault in Vedanta that You do not study it, although it is the
duty of.a Sannyasi to read and understand Vedanta?”
178 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

According to Mayavadi philosophers, Vedanta means the Sariraka commentary of Sankaracharya. By “Vedanta” and “Upanishads,” impersonal philosophers mean “according to the commentary of Sankaracharya,” the
greatest teacher of Mayavadi philosophy. After Sankaracharya came Sadananda Yogi, who said that Vedanta and Upanishads should be understood
through the commentary of Sankaracharya. Factually, it is not so; for the
Vedanta philosophy or the Upanishads there are many other commentaries
made by the Vaishnava Acharyas, rather than those of Sankaracharya.
Mayavadi philosophers influenced by Sankaracharya do not find any importance in the different Vaishnava philosophical understandings.

There are four different sects of Vaishnava Acharyas, called the Suddhadvaita,
Visistadvaita, Dvaidadvaita, and Achintya Bhedabheda; and all the Vaishnava
Acharyas have written commentaries on the Vedanta Sutra, which the Mayavadi
philosophers do not recognize. Mayavadis make a distinction between Krishna
and Krishna’s Body, and therefore the worship of Krishna by the Vaishnava
philosophers is not recognized by them.

Therefore, when the Mayavadi Sannyasis inquired from Lord Chaitanya
as to why He did not study Vedanta Sutra, the Lord replied as follows: “My
dear sir, you have inquired why I do not study Vedanta. In answer to this
question I may speak something, if you won't be sorry on hearing it.”

All the Mayavadi Sannyasis present said, “Now, we shall be very much
pleased to hear You, because we see You are just like Narayan, and Your
speeches are so nice that we are taking a great pleasure in hearing Your words.
We are very much obliged to see You and hear You. Therefore, whatever
You say, we shall be very glad to accept and hear patiently.”

Then the Lord began to speak about Vedanta philosophy as follows:
Vedanta Sutra is spoken by the Supreme Lord Himself. The Supreme Lord,
by His incarnation as Vyasadeva, has compiled this great philosophical treatise,
Vedanta Sutra. Vyasadeva’s incarnation of the Supreme Lord means that He
cannot be likened to the ordinary person, who has the four defects of material
existence. The defects of the conditioned soul are: 1. he must commit mistakes,
2. he must be illusioned, 3. he must possess the tendency to cheat others, and
4. his senses must be all imperfect. When we speak of the incarnation of
Godhead, we understand that He is transcendental to all these defects of the
conditioned living entity. Therefore, whatever has been spoken and written
by Vyasadeva is to be understood as perfect. The Upanishads and Vedanta
Sutra aim at the same subject matter: the Supreme Absolute Truth; and, when
we accept the import of Vedanta Sutra and the Upanishads directly, as they
The Goal of Vedanta Study 179

are stated, it becomes very glorious for us. But the commentary made by
Sankaracharya is indirect, and is very dangerous for the common man, because,
by understanding the import of the Upanishad in such an indirect, disruptive
way, one becomes practically barred from spiritual realization.

According to Skanda and Vayn Puranas, “Sutra” means a condensed form
of words, which carries meaning and import of immeasurable strength
without any mistake or fault. “Vedanta” means the end of Vedic knowledge.
In other words, any book which deals with the subject indicated by all the Vedas
is called Vedanta. For example, the Bhagavad Gita is also Vedanta, because in
the Bhagavad Gita we will find that the Lord says that the ultimate end of all
Vedic research is Krishna, Therefore, Bhagavad Gita and Srimad Bhagwatam,
which aim only at Krishna, are to be understood as Vedanta.

In transcendental realization there are three divisions of knowledge, and
they are called Prasthana Trai. The department of knowledge which is proven
by Vedic instruction, like the Upanishads, is called Sruti Prasthan. Authoritative books indicating the same thing and written by liberated souls like Vyasa—
for example Bhagavad Gita, Mahabarata and the Puranas, especially the Srimad
Bhagwatam, the Maha Purana—are called Nyaaprasthana. From the Vedas we
understand that the Vedas originated from the breathing of Narayan.
Vyasadeva, Who is an incarnation of the power of Narayan, has compiled the
Vedanta Sutra. According to the Sankara commentary there appears another
name, Apantartama Rishi, who is also credited with having compiled the
codes of the Vedanta Sutra. According to Lord Chaitanya, the Codes of Pancharatra and the codes of Vedanta are one and the same. The Vedanta Sutra,
being compiled by Vyasadeva, is to be understood as spoken by Narayan
Himself. From the whole descriptive literature about the Vedanta Sutra, it is
understood that there were many other Rishis contemporary with Vyasadeva
who also discussed this Vedanta Sutra. The following sages—Atriya, Asmarathyk, Audulomi, Karshnajini, Kasakritsna, Jaimimi, Badari, and other sages
such as Parasarikarmandi—also discussed Vedanta Sutra.

Actually, in the first three chapters of Vedanta Sutra, the relationship of
the living entities with the Supreme Lord is explained, and in the Third
Chapter the discharge of devotional service is explained. In the Fourth Chapter
the result of the relationship of discharging devotional service is explained.

The natural commentary on the Vedanta Sutra is Srimad Bhagwatam. The
great Acharyas of the four sections of the Vaishnava community—namely,
Ramanujacharya, Madhvacharya, Vishnu Swami, and Nimbarka—have also
written commentaries on the Vedanta Sutra in following the principles of
180 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Srimad Bhagwatam. At present the followers of all the Acharyas have written
many books following the principles of Srimad Bhagwatam as the commentary
on the Vedanta. Sankara’s commentary on the Vedanta Sutra, known as
Sarirakabhasya is very much adored by the impersonalist class of scholars. But
commentary on the Vedanta from the materialistic point of view is completely
adverse to the transcendental loving position of devotional service to the Lord.
And, therefore, Lord Chaitanya said that the direct commentary of the
Upanishad and Vedanta Sutra is glorious, and anyone who follows the Sarirakabhasya of Sankaracharya without following the direct path is certainly
doomed.

Lord Chaitanya admitted that Sankaracharya was an incarnation of Lord
Shiva, and Lord Shiva is one of the greatest devotees, a Mahajan of the Bhagwat
school. There are twelve great authorities on devotional service, and Lord
Shiva is one of them. Then, why did he adopt the process of Mayavadi philosophy? The answer is given in the Padma Purana, where there is a statement
by Lord Shiva as follows: “The Mayavadi philosophy is veiled Buddhist
philosophy.” In other words, the void philosophy of Buddha is more or less
repeated in the Mayavadi philosophy of impersonalism, althouth the Mayavadi
philosophy claims to be directed by the Vedic conclusions. Lord Shiva thus
admits that this philosophy was manufactured by him in the Age of Kali
as a Brahmin boy to mislead the atheist class of men: “Actually, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead has His transcendental Body, but I describe the
Supreme as impersonal. Similarly, I have explained the Vedanta Sutra also on
the same principles of Mayavadi philosophy.”

In the Shiva Puranam there is one statement by the Supreme Lord: “In
the beginning of the Dvapara Yuga, under My order, there will be many
sages who will bewilder the people in general by Mayavadi philosophy.”
In the Padma Purana, Lord Shiva personally says to Bhagavati Devi: “My
dear Devi, sometimes I speak Mayavadi philosophy for persons who are
engrossed in the modes of ignorance. But anyone in the modes of goodness
who happens to hear this Mayavadi philosophy falls. In the Mayavadi philosophy I say that the living entity and the Supreme Lord are one and the
same.”

Sadanada Yogi, one of the greatest Mayavadi Acharyas, has written in
his book, Vedanta Sara, as follows: “Absolute Truth of eternity, knowledge
and bliss is Brahman. Ignorance and all products of ignorance are non-Brahman.
Any products out of the three modes of material Nature are covered by ignorance, and all are different from the Supreme Cause and effect. This ignorance
The Goal of Vedanta Study 181

is manifested in a collective and individual sense. Collective ignorance is called Visuddhasatvapradhana. When that Visuddhasatvapradhana becomes manifested
within the ignorance of material Nature it is called the Lord, and the Lord
manifests all kinds of ignorance. Therefore Hs is known as Sarvajna.” According to the Mayavadi philosophy the Lord is the product of this material Nature,
and the living entity is in the lowest grade of ignorance. That is the sum and
substance of the Mayavadi philosophy.

If, however, we accept directly the import of the Upanishads, it is clear
that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is a Person with unlimited Potency.
For example, in the Brihadarnyak it is stated that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is the Origin of everything, and He has multiple different
potencies: “The Supreme Personality of Godhead is transcendental to the
cosmic manifestation of His time through His material energy, and He is the
Origin of all religiousness, and He is the Supreme Deliverer, and He 1s
Possesser of all opulences. Let me understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Who is just like the Sun, profusely distributing His different energies,
while beyond the cloud of this material cosmic manifestation. He is the
Master of masters, and He is the Supreme of the supremes. He is known
as the Greatest Lord, the Personality of Godhead. His energies and potencies
are multiple, variously distributed.” It is stated that Vishnu is the Supreme,
and those who are saintly persons are always anxious to see the Lotus Feet of
Vishnu. In the Aitariya Upanishad also it is stated that the Lord glanced over
the material Nature, and thus the cosmic manifestation came about. This is
also stated in the Prasna Upanishad.

When there is a negative description of the Lord in the Vedic literature,
just like Apani Pada, such a Mantra indicates that the Lord has no material
body, and that He has no material Form. But He has His Spiritual Body, He
has His transcendental Body, and He has His transcendental Form. The Mayavadi philosophers misunderstand this transcendental nature of the Supreme
Lord, and explain the Supreme Lord as impersonal. The Lord, His Name,
Form, Quality, Entourage and Abode all being in the transcendental world—
how can He be a transformation of this material Nature? Everything connected
with the Supreme Lord is eternal, blissful, and full of knowledge.

So, in effect, Sankaracharya delivered this Mayavadi philosophy to bewilder
a certain class of atheistic people. Actually, he never meant that the Supreme
Lord, the Personality of Godhead, is impersonal, with no Body or no Form.
Therefore, the intelligent persons should not attend any lecture on Mayavadi
philosophy. We should understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead
182 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Vishnu is not impersonal. He is a transcendental Person. The basic principle
of the cosmic manifestation is the energy of Vishnu. Mayavadi philosophy
cannot trace the energy of the Supreme Lord, but in all the Vedic literature
we have various evidences of the Supreme Lord’s various mainfestations of
energies. Vishnu is not the product of the material Nature, but material
Nature is the product of Vishnu’s potency. The Mayavadi philosopher understands that Vishnu is a product of this material Nature. If Vishnu is a product
of the material Nature, He can be counted as one of the demigods. One who
accepts Vishnu as one of the demigods is certainly mistaken and misled. And
how he is misled is explained in the Bhagavad Gita: “My material energy is
so powerful that it is very difficult to surpass the spell of material Nature, even
for the greatest scholar.”
CHAPTER TWENTY

  
  

NPS
—— yy a7
= 4K=
— : ) =
=—\ii =
ZAM

The Mayavadi Philosophers

Are Converted

It is concluded that Lord Krishna, or Vishnu, is not of.this material world,
but that He belongs to the Spiritual World. Anyone considering Him as one
of the demigods of the material world is a great offender. This is called blasphemy. Lord Vishnu is, therefore, not subject to perception by the material
senses, and neither can He be realized by mental speculation. There is no difference between the Body and Soul of the Supreme Lord Vishnu. In the material
world there is always the difference between the body and soul.

Anything material is enjoyed by the living entities because the living
entities are superior in nature, whereas the material Nature is of inferior quality.
Therefore, the superior quality of Nature, the living entities, can enjoy the
inferior quality of Nature, matter. Because Lord Vishnu, is in no way touched
by matter, He is not subject to the enjoyment of the living entities. The living
entities cannot gain knowledge of Vishnu by enjoying their mental speculative habits. The infinitesimal living entities are not, therefore, the enjoyers
of Vishnu, but they are enjoyed by Lord Vishnu. If somebody thinks that

183
184 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Vishnu is enjoyable, then he is the greatest offender. The greatest act of blasphemy is to consider Vishnu and the living entity on the same level.

The Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, is compared
with the blazing fire, whereas the innumerable living entities are compared
with the sparks emanating from the blazing fire. So, although both of them are
fire in quality, yet there is the distinction that Vishnu the Supreme is infinite,
whereas the living entities, which are sparks, are infinitesimal. The infinitesimal
living entities are emanations from the original infinite spirit. In other words,
in their constitutional position as infinitesimal spirits, there is no trace of matter.

The living entities are not as great as Narayan, Vishnu, Who is beyond the
Creation of this material world. This is accepted even by Sankaracharya—
that Narayan is beyond this material Creation. So neither Vishnu nor the living
entity are of the material Creation. Somebody may then enquire: Why were
such small particles of the spirit created at all? The answer is that the completeness of perfection of the Supreme Absolute Truth is possible when He is
both infinite and infinitesimal. If He is simply infinite and He is not infinitesimal,
then He is not perfect. The infinite portion is the Vishnu Tattwa, or the Supreme
Absolute Personality of Godhead; and the infinitesimal portion is the living
entity.

By the infinite desires of the Supreme Personality of Godhead there is the
existence of the Spiritual World, and by the infinitesimal desires of the living
entities there is this material world. When the infinitesimal living entities are
engaged in their infinitesimal desires for material enjoyment, they are called
Jiva Shakti; but when they are dove-tailed with the infinite, they are called
liberated souls. There is no question, therefore, as to why God created the
infinitesimal portions. It is the complementary and supplementary side of
the Supreme. It is essential, without any doubt, that the infinite must have the
infinitesimal portions. They are inseparable parts and parcels of the Soul.

And, because they are infinitesimal parts and parcels of the Supreme,
there is a reciprocation of feelings between the infinite and the infinitesimal.
Had there been no infinitesimal living entities, then of course the Supreme Lord
would have been inactive, and there would have not been any variegatedness
in spiritual life. As there is no meaning of a king if there is no subject, therefore there is no meaning of the Supreme God if there are no infinitesimal
living entities. There would have been no meaning of the word “Lord,” if
there were none to overlord. The conclusion is that the living entities are
counted as expansions of the energy of the Supreme Lord, and the Supreme
Lord, the Personality of Godhead, Krishna, is the Energetic.
The Mayavadi Philosophers Are Converted 185

In all the Vedic literature, such as Bhagavad Gita and Vishnu Purana, there is
innumerable evidence for this distinction between the energy and the Energetic.
In Bhagavad Gita, Seventh Chapter, sth verse, it is clearly stated that earth,
water, fire, air and sky are five principal gross elements of the material world.
Mind, intelligence and false ego are elements of the subtle matter. The whole
material Nature is considered to be divided into these eight elements, which
are the inferior quality of Nature. Another name for this inferior quality of
Nature is Maya, or illusion. Beyond these eight kinds of inferior Nature there
is another superior quality of Nature, which is called Paraprakriti. That
Paraprakriti is the living entity, and the entities are found all over this material
world. The purport is that the Supreme Lord is the Absolute Truth, the
Energetic, and that He has energy also. That energy, when not properly
manifested, or when covered by some shadow, is called Maya Shakti. The
cosmic manifestation is a product of that covered Maya Shakti.

The living entities are factually beyond this covered inferior energy. The
living entities have their pure spiritual existence, and their pure identity, and
they have their pure mental activities. And all of them are beyond the manifestation of this cosmic world. The living entity, his mind, his intelligence,
and his identity are beyond the range of this material world, but when he
enters into this material world by his desire to lord it over matter, then his
original mind, intelligence, and body become covered by the material energy.
When he is again uncovered from these material or inferior energies, he is
called liberated. And when he is liberated he has no false ego, but his real ego
comes again into existence.

Foolish mental speculators think that after liberation even the identity is
lost, but that is not so. Because we are eternally part and parcel, the living
entity, when liberated, revives his original, eternal part-and-parcel identity.
Aham Brahmasmi (I am not this body) does not mean that I lose my identity.
At the present moment I say that Iam matter, but in my liberated state I will
understand that Iam not matter, I am spirit soul, as part of the infinite. So to
become Krishna conscious or spiritually conscious and to be engaged in this
loving transcendental service of Krishna is the sign of the liberated stage.

In the Vishnu Purana, Sixth Chapter, 7th verse, it is very nicely and clearly
stated: “The energy of the Supreme Lord is divided into three: Para, Kshetrajna
and Avidya.” Para energy is actually the energy of the Supreme Lord; the
Kshetrajna energy is called the living entities; and the Avidya energy is called
this material world, or Maya. It is called Avidya, or ignorance, because under
the spell of this material energy one forgets his actual position and his relation186 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

ship with the Supreme Lord. It is concluded, therefore, that the living entities
represent one of the energies of the Supreme Lord. Such an infinitesimal part
and parcel of the Supreme Lord is called Jiva. If the Jiva is artificially put onto
the same level with the infinite Supreme—because both of them are Brahman,
or spirit—that will certainly lead to bewilderment.

The Mayavadi philosophers are perplexed before a learned Vaishnava
philosopher because the Mayavadi cannot explain the cause of bondage of the
living entities. They simply say: “It is out of ignorance,” but they cannot
explain why the Supreme is covered by this ignorance. The actual solution
is that the living entities, although qualitatively one with the Supreme are
infinitesimal, and are not infinite. Had they been infinite there would not have
been any possibility of being covered by ignorance. But, because the living
entities are infinitesimal, they are covered by another, an inferior, energy.
We can see their foolishness and ignorance when they try to explain that the
infinite is covered by ignorance. It is an offensive attempt to qualify the infinite
as subject to the spell of ignorance.

Sankara, although he attempted to cover the Supreme Lord by his Mayavadi philosophy, was doing so only by the order of the Supreme Lord. It
is to be understood that his teaching was a timely necessity, but not a permanent fact. In the Vedanta Sutra this distinction between energy and the
Energetic is accepted from the very beginning. In that Brahma, or Vedanta,
Sutra the first aphorism, Janmadyasya, is a clear explanation that the Supreme
Absolute Truth is the Origin or Source of all emanation. Therefore the
emanations are His energy, whereas He is the Energetic. Sankara has falsely
put his argument in this way: that if the transformation of energy is accepted,
then the Supreme Absolute cannot remain immutable. But that is not true;
in spite of unlimited energy being generated, why not accept that the Supreme
Absolute Truth remains always the same, even though there is the emanation
of unlimited energies from Him? Sankaracharya has therefore incorrectly
and wrongly established the theory of illusion.

In this connection Ramanujacharya has discussed the point very nicely
as follows: “If you argue that before the creation of this material world there
was only one Absolute Truth, then how is it possible that the living entity
emanated from Him? If He was alone, how could He produce or generate the
infinitesimal living entities?” In reference to this question the Vedas state that
everything is generated from the Absolute Truth, everything is being maintained by the Absolute Truth, and, after annihilation, everything enters into
Him. From this statement of the Upanishads, it is clear that the living entities
The Mayavadi Philosophers Are Converted 187

enter into the Supreme Existence in their liberated state without changing
their original constitutional position of activity.

We must always remember that the Supreme Lord has His creative function; and, similarly, the infinitesimal living entities have also a creative function.
When they are liberated and enter into the Supreme after the dissolution of
this material body, their creative function is not lost. On the contrary, the
creative function of the living entity becomes properly manifested in the
liberated stage. If the living entity’s activities are definitely manifested when
he is in this material condition, then how is it possible that when he is in his
spiritual liberated stage his activities can be stopped? Entering is therefore
understood in the sense that the bird enters into the trees, or the animals enter
into the forest, or the flying vehicle enters into the sky.

While explaining Code Number One of the First Chapter of Vedanta
Sutra, Sankara has most unceremoniously tried to explain that Brahman or
the Supreme Absolute Truth is impersonal. Similarly, he has tried to twist
most cunningly the doctrine of by-product into the doctrine of state of change.
Actually, there is no change of state for the Supreme Absolute. It is simply
by His inconceivable power of doing things that there comes a by-product.
A relative truth produced out of another truth is called the transformation
of a by-product. For example, when a sitting chair is produced out of crude
wood it is the transformation of a by-product. Similarly, the Supreme Absolute
Truth, Brahman, is immutable, and when we find a by-product—the living
entity or this cosmic manifestation—it is called a transformation of that byproduct of the Supreme. Another example can be cited in this connection:
that of milk and yogurt. Yogurt is a transformation of milk. In this way, if
we study the living entities and the cosmic manifestation, it will appear that
they are not different from the original Absolute Truth.

But from the Vedic literature we understand that the Absolute Truth has
various multiforms of energy, and therefore the living entities and the cosmic
manifestation are only a demonstration of His various energies. As energies
are non-separable from the Energetic, therefore this transformation of the
living entity and the cosmic manifestation is an inseparable truth which is
part of the same Absolute Truth. Such a conclusion about the Absolute Truth
and the relative truth should not be unacceptable to any sane man.

The Supreme Absolute Truth has His inconceivable potency, and out
of that potential energy this cosmic manifestation has been effected. In other
words, the Supreme Absolute Truth is the ingredient and the living entity
and the cosmic manifestation are by-products. In the Taittiriya Upanishad it is
188 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

clearly stated; Yato va imani bhutani jayande. This clearly states that the
Absolute Truth is the original reservoir of all ingredients, and this material
world of the living entities is produced out of those ingredients.

Less intelligent persons who cannot understand the doctrine of by-products
cannot grasp how this cosmic manifestation and the living entity are simultaneously one and different from the Absolute Truth. Without understanding
this truth, if, out of unnecessary fear, one concludes that this cosmic manifestation and the living entity are false, by putting forward the example of mistaking
a rope for a snake, as Sankaracharya does, or mistaking the oyster shell for gold,
surely that sort of argument is simply cheating. The examples of mistaking
a rope for a snake and the oyster shell for gold, mentioned in the Mandukya
Upanishad, have their different applications, and can be understood as follows:
the living entity in his original constitution is pure spirit. And when a human
being identifies himself with this material body, that is a case of accepting the
rope as a snake, or the oyster shell as gold. The doctrine of transformation
of state is accepted when one thing is mistaken for another. Actually, the body
is not the living entity; and to accept the body as the living entity is the doctrine
of transformation of state. Every conditioned soul is undoubtedly contaminated
by this doctrine of transformation of state.

This conditional state of the living entity is a diseased condition. Originally, the living entity and the Original Cause of this cosmic manifestation are
certainly not in this state of transformation. But mistaken thoughts and arguments can overcome a person when he forgets about the inconceivable energies
and activities of the Supreme Lord. Even in the material world there are many
examples: the Sun is producing unlimited energies from time immemorial,
and so many by-products result from the Sun; yet there is no change in the
heat and temperature of the Sun itself. If the Sun can maintain itself in its
original state of temperature—although it is a material product—in spite
of producing so many by-products, then is it very difficult to understand that
the Supreme Absolute Truth, in spite of His producing so many by-products
by His inconceivable energy, is not changed at all? Therefore, there is no question of the transformation of His state.

It is learned from the Vedic literature that there is a material product which
is called touchstone which, simply by touch, can transform iron into gold.
The touchstone can produce an unlimited quantity of gold, and still the touchstone itself does not change its state. Therefore, to suppose that this cosmic
manifestation and the living entities are false or illusory, as advocated by the
Mayavadi philosopher, is ignorance. No sane man should impose ignorance
The Mayavadi Philosophers Are Converted 189

and illusion upon the Supreme Absolute Truth, Who is Absolute in everything. There is no possibility of change or ignorance or illusion with Him.
Supreme Brahman is transcendental and completely different from any sort
of material conception. Therefore, in the Supreme Absolute Truth, there is
every possibility of inconceivable potential energy.

In the Svetasvetara Upanishad it is stated that the Supreme Absolute Personality of Godhead is full of inconceivable energies, and no one else has such
energy. By the misunderstanding of such inconceivable energies of the
Supreme, one may conclude that the Supreme Absolute Truth is impersonal,
but this is false. Such a conclusion is only a delusion experienced by a living
being when he is in an acute stage of disease. In Srimad Bhagwatam also there
are statements that the Supreme Atma, the Lord, has got inconceivable, innumerable potencies. In the Brahma Samhita also it is stated that in the Supreme
Spirit there are many variegated, inconceivable energies.

In the Absolute Truth there is no possibility of ignorance. Ignorance and
knowledge are conceptions of this world of duality, but in the Absolute there
cannot be any ignorance. Therefore it is simply foolishness to consider that the
Absolute becomes covered by ignorance. If the Absolute Truth has the possibility of ignorance, how can it be said to be Absolute?

Understanding of the inconceivable energy of the Absolute is the only
solution to the question of duality. In other words, the inconceivable energy
of the Absolute is the cause of the doctrine of duality. By such inconceivable
energy, the Supreme Absolute Truth, without being changed, can produce
this cosmic manifestation and the living entities, just as the touchstone can
produce unlimited quantities of gold without being changed. Because the
Absolute Truth has such inconceivable energy, the material quality of covering
by ignorance cannot be applied to the Absolute Truth. True variegatedness
in the Absolute Truth is therefore a product of that inconceivable energy.
It can be safely concluded that this cosmic manifestation is by-product of that
inconceivable energy. And when we accept the inconceivable energy of the
Supreme Lord, then there is no duality at all.

The expansion of the energy of the Supreme Lord is as true as the Supreme
Lord. In the manifestation of the Supreme energy there is no question of
transformation of state. The same example of the touchstone can be cited
again: that, in spite of producing unlimited quantities of gold, the touchstone
remains the same. (We hear, therefore, some sages say that the Supreme is
the Ingredient or Cause of this cosmic manifestation.)

The example of accepting the rope as the snake is also not irregular. When
190 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

we accept the rope as the snake it is to be understood that one has previous
experience of the snake. Otherwise, how can one mistake the rope as a snake?
Therefore, the conception of the snake is not untrue or unreal. It is the question of application. When, by mistake, we impose our conviction on the rope
as being a snake, that is ignorance. But the very idea of the snake is not itself
ignorance. Similarly, when we accept a mirage of water in the desert, there
is no question of water being a false concept. Water is a fact, but the application of water in the desert is a mistake.

Therefore, this cosmic manifestation is not false, as is stated by Sankara.
There is nothing false here. To consider this material manifestation as false
is another ignorance. The Mayavadi theory that this world is false is ignorance.
The conclusion of Vaishnava philosophy is that this cosmic manifestation is
a by-product of the inconceivable energy of the Supreme Lord.

The principal word in the Vedas, Pranava Omkara, is the sound representation of the Supreme Lord. Therefore Omkara should be taken as the sound
Supreme. Sankara has falsely preached Tatvamasi as the Supreme vibration
in the Vedas, instead of Omkara. Omkara is the reservoir of all the energies
of the Supreme Lord. The accent on the word Tatvamasi by Sankara, as the

Supreme vibration of the Vedas, is wrong, because this word Tatvamasi is a
secondary word only. This word suggests only a partial representation of
the Vedas. In the Bhagavad Gita the Lord has in many places given importance
to Omkara. The importance of Omkara is mentioned in the Eighth Chapter,
13th verse, Ninth Chapter, 17th verse, and Seventeenth Chapter, 23rd verse.
Similarly, the importance of Omkara is stated in the Atharva Veda. Similarly,
we get the importance of Omkara vibration in the Mandukya Upanishad.

Srila Jiva Goswami has given great importance to the word Omkara
in his Bhagavat Sandarbha. He says: “Omkara is the most confidential sound
representation of the Supreme Lord.” The sound representation or Name
of the Supreme Lord is as good as the Supreme Lord. By vibration of such
sound as Omkara, or of Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare
Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, one can be delivered
from the contamination of this material world. And, because such vibrations
of transcendental sound can deliver a conditional soul, it is known as Tarak, or
deliverer.

The sound vibration of the Supreme Lord is identical with the Supreme
Lord. In the Narada Pancharatra also it is stated that when sound vibration is
practiced by the conditioned soul, the Supreme Lord is present on the tongue
of such a vibrating person. In the Mandukya Upanishad the same importance
The Mayavadi Philosophers Are Converted I9I

is given, in that whatever is seen as spiritual, with the addition of Omkara, is
perfect spiritual vision. In the Spiritual World or in the spiritual vision there
is nothing except Omkara, or the one alternate, Om. Unfortunately, Sankara
has given up this chief word, Omkara, and he has whimsically accepted
Tatvamasi as the Supreme vibration of the Vedas. By accepting such a secondary
word of the Vedas as Tatvamasi, leaving aside the principal word Omkara,
he has given up direct interpretation in favor of his own indirect interpretation of the Scripture.
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

 

Further Talks With Prakasananda

Stipad Sankaracharya has unceremoniously obscured the Krishna Consciousness described in the Purusa Vedanta Sutra by manufacturing an indirect
interpretation, and giving up the direct interpretation. But unless we take all
the statements of Vedanta Sutra as self-evident, there is no need to study Vedanta
Sutra. To interpret the verses of Vedanta Sutra according to one’s own whimsy
is the greatest disservice to the self-evident Vedas.

So far as Omkara Pranava is concerned, He is considered the sound incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; as such Omkara is eternal,
unlimited, transcendental, supreme, and indestructible. He is the beginningless,
and He is the beginning, middle and end. When one understands the Omkara
as such, then he becomes immortal. One should know Omkara as a representation of the Supreme situated in everyone’s heart. Anyone who understands
Omkara and Vishnu as one and the same and all-pervading, never laments
in the material world, nor does he remain anymore as a Sudra.

192
Further Talks With Prakasananda 193

Although He (Omkara) has no material Form, He is unlimitedly expanded,
and has unlimited Form. By understanding the Omkara one can become free
from the duality of the material world and be placed in Absolute Knowledge.
Therefore, Omkara is the most auspicious representation of the Supreme Lord.
Such is the description of the Mandukya Upanishad. One should not foolishly
interpret such a description of the Upanishad, and say that because the Supreme
Personality of Godhead “cannot” appear Himself in this material world in
His own Form, therefore the sound representation Omkara is here. By such
a false interpretation, Omkara comes to be considered as something material,
and the eulogizing of Omkara is misunderstood as simply an exhibition of His
value. Actually, Omkara is as good as other incarnations of the Supreme Lord.

The Lord has innumerable incarnations, and Omkara is one of them,
as an incarnation of the alphabet. As stated in the Bhagavad Gita: “Amongst
the letters I am Omkara”. This means that Omkara is non-different from
Krishna—that is the right interpretation. The impersonalist, however, gives
more importance to the Omkara than to the Personality of Godhead, Krishna.
In fact, however, any representational incarnation of the Supreme Lord is
non-different from Him. Such an incarnation or representation is as good
spiritually as the Supreme Lord. Omkara is therefore the ultimate representation of all the Vedas. The Vedic Mantras or hymns have transcendental value
because they are prefixed by the pronoun Omkara. The Vaishnavas, however,
interpret Omkara as follows: By the letter O, Krishna the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is indicated; by the letter U, Krishna’s eternal consort Srimati
Radharani is indicated; and by the letter M, the eternal servitor of the Supreme
Lord, the living entity, is indicated. Sankara has not given so much importance
to the Omkara. It is found, however, in the Vedas and in the Ramayana and
in the Puranas and in the Mahabarata, from the beginning to the end, and in
the middle—everywhere. Thus the glories of the Supreme Lord, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, are declared.

Thus Lord Chaitanya condemned the attempt at indirect interpretation
of the Vedanta Sutra, and the Sannyasis present were all struck with wonder
by His explanation. After hearing the direct interpretation of the Vedanta
Sutra from Lord Chaitanya, one of the Sannyasis in the meeting immediately
declared, “O Sripad Chaitanya, whatever You have explained by condemning
the indirect interpretation of Omkara is not at all a useless argument. Only
the fortunate persons can accept Your interpretation as the right one. Actually,
every one of us now knows that the interpretations given by Sankara are all
194 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

artificial and imaginary, but because we belong to the sect, therefore we took
it for granted to be the right interpretation. We shall be very glad to hear
You if You explain further the Vedanta Sutra by direct interpretation.”

After this, Lord Chaitanya explained each and every verse of the Vedanta
by direct interpretation. He thus explained the word Brahman. Brahman means
the greatest, and the direct interpretation of greatest is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Greatest means full with six opulences. The Supreme Personality
of Godhead is the Reservoir of all wealth, all fame, all strength, all beauty,
all knowledge, and all renunciation. When Lord Krishna was present Personally on the Earth, He exhibited these six opulences in full. Nobody was
richer than Lord Krishna, nobody was more learned than Krishna, nobody
was more beautiful than Krishna, nobody was stronger than Krishna, nobody
was more famous than Krishna, and nobody was more renounced than Krishna.
Therefore the Supreme Personality of Krishna is the Supreme Brahman. This
is confirmed in the Bhagavad Gita, Tenth Chapter, when Arjuna thus addressed
Him: “You are Param Brahman,” the Supreme Brahman. Therefore, Brahman
means the Greatest, and the greatest means the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krishna. He is the Shelter of the Absolute Truth, Para Tattwa,
because He is Param Brahman. But, at the same time, in all His opulences
and exhibitions of wealth, fame, strength, beauty, knowledge and renunciation, there is nothing material. Everything spiritual and transcendental in all
the Vedic verses and hymns indicates that Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krishna. Wherever, therefore, the word Brahman appears in the Vedas, it
should be understood to indicate Krishna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The intelligent person at once replaces the Name Krishna wherever there is
the word Brahman.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is transcendental to the material
modes of Nature, but He is fully qualified with transcendental qualities. To
accept the Supreme as impersonal is to deny the manifestation of spiritual
energies. When the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Brahman, is full with
spiritual energies, and somebody simply accepts His impersonal exhibition of
spiritual energy, then he does not accept this Absolute Truth in full. To accept
It in full means to accept the spiritual variegatedness also, which is transcendental
to the material modes of Nature. Therefore, failing to indicate the Supreme
Lord, the impersonalist conception is incomplete.

The approved method of understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna, is the path of devotional service, as is confirmed in every Vedic
Further TalksWith Prakasananda 195

Scripture. The devotional service of the Lord begins by hearing about Him.
There are nine different methods in devotional service, of which hearing is the
basic one. Hearing, chanting, remembering, worshipping—all these are the
process of attaining the highest perfection of understanding the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This process of understanding the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is known as Abhidheya, or practice of devotional service within
our conditional life.

In practice it is also experienced that anyone who takes to Krishna Consciousness does not like to deviate to any other consciousness. This Krishna
Consciousness is a development of love for Krishna, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. And this development of love of Godhead is called the fifth
dimensional interest of the human being. When one takes to this process
of transcendental devotional service, or love of Godhead, he relishes his relationship with Krishna directly, and by such reciprocation in relishing transcendental dealings with Krishna, Krishna becomes gradually a Personal
associate of the devotee. The devotee eternally enjoys blissful life. Therefore,
the purport of the Vedanta Sutra is to re-establish the lost relationship of the
human being with the Supreme Lord Krishna, to execute devotional service,
and ultimately to achieve the highest goal of life, love of Godhead. These three
principles of transcendental life are described in the Vedanta Sutra, and nothing
more.

After this explanation of Vedanta Sutra by direct interpretation of the verses.
one of the disciples of Prakasananda Saraswati, considered to be the chief
amongst all his disciples, stood up in the assembly and began to praise Lord
Chaitanya as Personally the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayan. He
very much appreciated the explanation of Vedanta Sutra by Lord Chaitanya,
and said publicly that the direct explanation by Lord Chaitanya of the meaning
of the Upanishad and Vedanta Sutra, “is so pleasing that we forget ourselves,
and forget that we belong to the Mayavadi sect.” It must be admitted herewith
that the explanations by Sankaracharya of the Upanishads and Vedanta Sutra
are all imaginary. We sometimes accept such imaginary explanations for the
sake of sectarian feuds, but actually such an explanation does not satisfy us.
Simply by accepting the order of Sannyasa one does not become free from
material entaglements. Actually, if we understand the explanation given by
Lord Chaitanya, that will help us. Sri Krishna Chaitanya has very nicely explained the meaning of Harer Nama Harer Nama Harer Nama Eva Kevalam—
and we are all very much pleased. There is no alternative to devotional service.
196 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Without devotional service nobody can become liberated from the material
clutches. Especially in this age, when simply by chanting Hare Krishna, Hare
Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare, one can achieve the highest liberation.”

In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, it is stated
that, for a person who gives up the path of devotional service and simply
undergoes some labor of life for knowledge, there is no other profit than taking
the trouble to understand what is matter and what is spirit. It is considered
useless labor to try to get grains from the husks which are empty. Similarly,
in the Tenth Canto, Second Chapter, it is also said that a person who gives
up the transcendental loving service of the Supreme Lord and artificially
considers himself liberated, never attains to actual liberation. On the contrary,
with great labor of austerity and penances he may be elevated to the status of
liberation, but for want of shelter unto the Lotus Feet of the Supreme Lord,
he falls down again into the material contamination.

The Supreme Brahman cannot be accepted as impersonal. Otherwise
the six opulences, meaning the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will not be
acceptable in the concept of Brahman. All the Vedas and the Puranas affirm that
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is full of spiritual energies. Foolish persons do not accept the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
therefore His Pastimes and His Activities are derided by them. They misinterpret the transcendental Body of Krishna as a creation of the Material Nature,
and this is the greatest offense and sinful act. One should, therefore, accept
the words of Chaitanya just as He explained in this assembly.

The individual Personality of the Supreme Absolute Truth is explained
in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Third Canto, Ninth Chapter: “O my Supreme
Lord, the transcendental Form which J am just seeing is simple transcendental
pleasure without any change and without any contamination of the material
modes. It is full of effulgence and there is no greater manifestation of the
Absolute Truth than this. O Soul of everyone, You are the Creator of this
cosmic manifestation with all the material elements, and I surrender unto You,
Your transcendental Form, O Krishna! O Most Auspicious Universe! You
advent Yourself in Your Original Personal Form for the Purpose of being
worshipped by us. We perceive You either by meditation or by worshipping
directly. Foolish persons, mostly contaminated by the material Nature, do
not give much importance to Your transcendental Form, and therefore they
are understood to be gliding down to hell.”

The same statement is confirmed in the Bhagavad Gita, Ninth Chapter,
Further Talks With Prakasananda 197

tith verse: “Only the foolish persons mock at Me because I am here just like
human being. Such foolish persons do not know the intrinsic value of this
transcendental Form, that I am the Proprietor, Iam the Master, I am the Lord
of All Creation.”

For such foolish, demoniac persons, hell is also confirmed in the Bhagavad
Gita, Sixteenth Chapter, 19th verse: “Such deriding persons who are envious
of Me and My devotee, I put into this material world in the most degraded
species of life, and being thus situated in such degraded forms, the demoniac
persons have no chance to understand the Supreme Personality of God.”

The doctrine of by-product, Parinamavada, is ascertained from the very
beginning of the Vedanta Sutra, but Acharya Sankara has artificially tried to
hide it and to establish the doctrine of transformation of state, Vivartavata,
and he has the audacity to say that Vyasa is mistaken. All the Vedic literature,
including the Puranas, confirm that the Supreme Lord is the center of Spiritual
energy and variegatedness. The Mayavadi philosopher, however, is puffed
up, in his own incompetence, and cannot understand variegatedness in spiritual
energy. He therefore falsely conceives that the spiritual variegatedness is no
more than material variegatedness. Deluded by this false belief, he derides
the Pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such foolish persons,
being unable to understand the spiritual activities of the Supreme Lord,
consider Krishna as one of the products of this material Nature. This is the
greatest offense which can be committed by any human being. Lord Chaitanya therefore establishes that Krishna is Sat Chit Ananda Vigraha, the Form
of Eternity, Knowledge and Bliss, and is always engaged in His transcendental
Pastimes of spiritual variegatedness.

The student of Prakasananda summarized the explanation of Lord
Chaitanya and concluded: “We have practically given up the actual path
of spiritual realization. We simply engage in nonsense talk. The Mayavadi
philosophers who are serious about attaining benediction should engage in
the devotional service of Krishna, but instead they take pleasure only in useless
talk. We admit herewith that by the explanation of Sankara the actual import
of Vedic literature is hidden. Only the explanation given by Chaitanya is
acceptable, and all other interpretations are useless.”

After thus explaining his position, that particular student of Prakasananda
Saraswati engaged himself in the chanting of Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna,
Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare|/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
Prakasananda Saraswati saw that his chief student was engaged in chanting
Hare Krishna, and he too admitted the fault of Sankaracharya, and spoke
198 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

as follows: “Acharya Sankara wanted to establish the doctrine of monism, and
therefore he had no other alternative than to interpret the Vedanta Sutra in
a different way. If he accepts the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then the
doctrine of monism cannot be established. Therefore, by his illusory scholarship, he has tried to cover the actual meaning of the Vedanta Sutra. Not only
Sankara, but any author who wants to give his own views must curtail and
misinterpret the Vedanta Sutra.”

The Lord therefore gave the direct meaning of the Vedanta Sutra. No
Vedic Scripture can be used for indirect speculation; not only Sankara, but
other materialistic philosophers like Kapila, Gautama, Astavakra, Patanjali
—every one of them has tried to put forward philosophical speculations in
a different way. The philosopher Jaimina and his other followers, who are
all more or less logicians, have given up the real meaning of the Vedas, devotional service, and have tried to establish the Absolute Truth as subject to the
material world. It is their opinion that if we do our material activities nicely,
then if there is any God He will be pleased and give us the desired result.
Similarly, the atheist Kapila has tried to establish that there is no God Who
is the Creator of this material world. But he (Kapila) has analyzed the material
world’s elements and their combination as the cause of creation. He has tried
to establish this. Similarly, Gautama and Kanad have given stress to the material
elements, and have tried to establish that atomic energy is the origin of creation. Similarly, the impersonalists and monists like Astavakra have tried
to establish the impersonal effulgence of the Brahmajyoti as the Supreme.
Similarly, Patanjali, one of the greatest authorities on the Yoga system, has
tried to conceive an imaginary Form of the Supreme Lord.

To summarize their philosophy, it is understood that all these materialistic philosophers have tried to avoid the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
as they wanted to put forward their own mentally concocted philosophies.
But Vyasadeva, the learned sage and incarnation of Godhead, has thoroughly
studied all these philosophical speculations of different sages; and to answer
all of them he has compiled the Vedanta Sutra, which simply indicates the
relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, execution of devotional
service, and ultimate achievement of love of Godhead. In the very beginning
of the Vedanta Sutra, the verse Janmadyasa yata appears and is explained in his
Srimad Bhagwatam in which Vyasa establishes at the very beginning that the
Supreme Source of everything is a cognizant, Transcendental Person.

The impersonalist tries to explain that the impersonal effulgence of the
Supreme Lord, or Brahmajyoti, is beyond these material modes of Nature, but
Further Talks With Prakasananda 199

at the same time he wants to establish the Supreme Personality of Godhead
as contaminated by the modes of material Nature. The Vedanta Sutra establishes
that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not only transcendental to the
material modes of nature, but also that He has innumerable transcendental
qualities and energies. All these speculative philosophers are one in denying
the existence of the Supreme Lord Vishnu, and they are very much enthused
to put forward their own theories to be recognized by the people. Unfortunate persons become enamoured of these atheistic philosophers, and thus they
can never understand the real nature of the Absolute Truth. It is better for them,
therefore, to follow in the footsteps of great souls who are called Mahajans.
According to Srimad Bhagwatam there are twelve Mahajans or great souls.
They are: 1. Brahma, 2. Lord Shiva, 3. Narada, 4. Vaivasvata Manu, 5. Kapila
(not the atheist, but the original Kapila), 6. the Kumaras, 7. Prahlada, 8. Bhisma,
9. Janaka, 10. Bali, 11. Sukadeva Goswami, 12. Yamaraj.

According to Mahabharata there is no use of arguing about the Absolute
Truth. Because there are different kinds of Vedic Scriptures and philosophical
understandings, and no philosopher is agreeable to another philosopher.
Everyone is trying to give us his own point of view, rejecting the other. Therefore, to understand the prime necessity of religious principles is very difficult.
It is better to follow in the footsteps of the great Mahajans, Great Souls, as
above mentioned. One is then able to achieve the desired success. Lord Chaitanya’s teaching is just like nectar, and it holds whatever you need. The best
way to take to this path, is to follow.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

 

The Srimad Bhagwatam

After this incident of the conversion of the Mayavadi Sannyasis into the
path of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, many many scholars and inquisitive persons
used to visit Lord Chaitanya at Benares. All of them could not see Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu at His residence, and therefore they used to stand in line to see
Lord Chaitanya as He used to pass on His way to the temple of Viswanath
and Bindumadhav. One day He visited the temple along with His associates—
Chandra Sekhar Acharya, Paramananda, Tapan Mishra, Sanatan Goswami,
etc. He was singing,

Hari haraye namah Krishna Yadavaya namah

Gopala Govinda Rama Sri Madhusudana
—and while He was singing like that, chanting and dancing, thousands of
people gathered around Him, and there was a roaring following the vibration
of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. This vibration was so tumultuous that Prakasananda Saraswati, who was sitting nearby, came immediately along with his
disciples, and as soon as he saw the beautiful Body of Lord Chaitanya and

200
The Srimad Bhagwatam 201

His nice dancing, along with His associates, he also joined and began to sing
with Him:
Hari! Hari!

All the inhabitants of Benares were struck with wonder by seeing the dancing
of Lord Chaitanya in ecstasy. Lord Chaitanya, however, checked Himself
in His continuous ecstasy, and stopped His dancing when He saw that the
Mayavadi Sannyasis were also present. As soon as He stopped His chanting
and dancing, Prakasananda Saraswati fell at the feet of Lord Chaitanya.
Lord Chaitanya tried to stop him and said: “Oh, you are the Spiritual Master
of the whole world, Jagat Guru, and I am not equal even to your disciple. You
should not therefore worship an inferior like Me, Who is not even equal to the
disciple of your disciple. You are exactly like Supreme Brahman, and if you
fall down at My Feet it is a very great offense on My part. Although you have
no vision of duality, still for the teachings of the people in general you should
not do this.”

Prakasananda Saraswati replied, “Previously I spoke ill of You many
times. Therefore, in order to free myself from the result of my offense, I fall
down at Your Feet.” He quoted in this connection a verse of Vedic literature
in which it is stated that when even a liberated soul commits offense to the
Supreme Lord he becomes again a victim of the material contamination. He
quoted another verse from Srimad Bhagwatam, from the Tenth Canto, Thirtyfourth Chapter, in connection with Nanda Maharaj and the attack of a serpent
who was previously Vidyadhavarehita. This serpent, being touched by the
Lotus Feet of Krishna, regained his previous body and thus he was freed from
the reaction of his sinful activities.

Lord Chaitanya, after hearing the equation of himself with Krishna, mildly
protested against such behavior. The fact is, He wanted to warn people in
general not to compare the Supreme Lord with any living entity. Although
He was the Supreme Lord Himself, still, to teach us, He protested against
this comparison, and said that nobody should be compared with the Supreme
Lord Krishna—that is the greatest offense. Lord Chaitanya always maintained
that Vishnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is great and the living entities, however great they may be, are not the infinite, but are infinitesimal.
He quoted, in this connection, a verse from Vaishnava Tantra, in the Padma
Purana, where it is stated: “Any person who compares the Supreme Lord
even with the greatest of demigods like Brahma and Shiva, must be considered a number one atheist.”

Prakasananda replied, “I can understand that You are the Supreme
202 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Personality of Godhead, Krishna, but even though You present Youself as
a devotee, still You are worshippable by me, because You are greater than all
of us in education and in realization. Therefore, by blaspheming You, we
committed the greatest offense and You should excuse us.”

How a devotee becomes the greatest of all transcendentalists is stated in
the Srimad Bhagwatam, Sixth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter: “There are many
liberated souls, and there are many perfected souls; but out of all such liberated
and perfected souls, one who is a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the best. Such devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are
always calm and quiet, and their perfection is very rarely to be seen even in
millions of persons.”

Prakasananda quoted another verse from the Tenth Canto, Fourth Chapter, in which it is stated that duration of life, prosperity, fame, religiousness,
and the benediction of higher authorities—everything gained, becomes lost
by transgressing the respect of a devotee. He quoted another verse from Srimad
Bhagwatam, Seventh Canto, Fifth Chapter, in which it is stated that the touch of
the Lotus Feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead causes the disappearance
of all kinds of misgivings of the conditioned soul. But this facility of touching
the Lotus Feet of the Supreme Lord is not possible unless one receives benediction by the dust of the Lotus Feet of a pure devotee of the Lord. In other words,
nobody can become a pure devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
without being favored by another pure devotee of the Lord.

Prakasananda Saraswati spoke further: “Now I am taking shelter of Your
Lotus Feet, for I want to be elevated to be a devotee of the Supreme Lord.”

After talking in this way, both Prakasananda Saraswati and Lord Chaitanya sat together and Prakasananda Saraswati began to enquire from the
Lord as follows: “Whatever You have said in pointing out discrepancies
in the Mayavadi philosophy is known to us also, because we know that all
the commentaries on Vedic Scriptures by Mayavadi philosophers are in error
by interpretation—especially those by Sankaracharya, whose interpretation
of Vedanta Sutra is all his own imagination. You have not explained the codes
of Vedanta Sutra and Upanishad by Your imagination, but You have explained
them as they are, and by hearing Your explanation, all of us are very pleased.
Such explanations of the codes of Vedanta Sutra or Upanishads could not be
given by anyone else except the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and You
have all the potencies. Kindly explain further about the Vedanta Sutra, so that
I may be benefitted.”

Lord Chaitanya again protested against His being called the Supreme Lord,
The Srimad Bhagwatam 203

and He said, “My dear sir, Iam an ordinary living entity. I cannot know the
meaning of Vedanta Sutra, but Vyasadeva, Who is an incarnation of Narayan,
knows the real meaning of the Vedanta Sutra. No ordinary living being can
interpret the Vedanta Sutra with his mundane education. In order to curb
commentary on Vedanta Sutra by unscrupulous persons, the author, Vyasadeva
Himself, has already commented on the Vedanta Sutra by writing Srimad
Bhagwatam.” In other words, if the author himself explains the purport of his
book, that is excellent. Nobody can understand the author’s mind unless the
author himself discloses the purport of his language. Therefore Vedanta Sutra
should be understood by the commentary of the Author Himself, which is
Srimad Bhagwatam.

Pranava or Omkara is the divine substance of all the Vedas. Omkara is
explained further in the Gayatri Mantra, as exactly explained in the Srimad
Bhagwatam. There are four verses in this connection. These verses are explained
to Brahma, and Brahma explained them again to Narada, and Narada explained
them to Vyasa. Therefore the purport of the verses in the Srimad Bhagwatam
comes down in disciplic succession. It is not that anyone and everyone can
make his own commentary on the Vedanta Sutra foolishly, and mislead the
readers. Anyone who wants to understand Vedanta Sutra must read Srimad
Bhagwatam carefully. Under the instruction of Narada Muni, Vyasadeva
compiled Srimad Bhagwatam with the purpose of explaining the Vedanta Sutra
codes. Vedanta Sutra was written before Bhagwatam. After hearing from Narada
Muni, Vyasadeva commentated on the Vedanta Sutra. By writing Srimad
Bhagwatam He collected all the essence of the Upanishads, the purpose of which
was explained also in the Vedanta Sutra. Srimad Bhagwatam is therefore the
essence of all Vedic knowledge. That which is stated in the Upanishads and
stated in the Vedanta Sutra is explained very nicely in the Srimad Bhagwatam.

There is a passage from Isho Upanishad, similiar to one in the Srimad
Bhagwatam, Eighth Canto, First Chapter, the purport of which is that whatever one sees in the cosmic manifestation, everywhere, is the Supreme Lord’s
energy, which is non-different from Him. Therefore, He is the Controller of
all living entities, and the Friend and Maintainer of everyone. We should live
by the mercy of God, and by the things allotted to our particular living condition. Thus one enjoys life, and nobody should encroach on any other’s
property.

In other words, the purpose of the Upanishad and Vedanta, and that of Srimad
Bhagwatam, are one and the same. If anyone studies Srimad Bhagwatam carefully,
he will find that all the Upanishads and Vedanta Sutra codes are nicely explained
204 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

there. In Bhagwatam also the subject matter is divided into three: to establish
the eternal relationship with the Supreme Lord, how to act in that relationship,
and, lastly, how to achieve the highest benefit from it.

The four verses dealing with Ahameva asam agrey are the gist of the whole
Bhagwatam, and this is very nicely explained as follows: “I am the Supreme
Center of relationship of all living entities, and My knowledge is the Supreme
Knowledge, and the process by which I can be achieved by the living entity
is called Abhidheya. And, by the Abhidheya process, one attains to the highest
perfection of life, love of Godhead. When one attains that stage of life, love
of Godhead, then his life becomes perfect.” The explanation of these four
verses is given in the Srimad Bhagwatam.

In this connection Lord Chaitanya gave a short description of the principles
of the four slokas of Srimad Bhagwatam as follows: Nobody can understand the
consitutional position of the Supreme Lord—how He is situated, what are
His transcendental qualities, what are His transcendental activities, how He
is full with six kinds of opulences. These things cannot be understood by
mental speculators or by one’s academic education. These things are to be
understood by the mercy of the Lord, as has been stated in the Bhagavad
Gita: one who is fortunate enough to be favored by the Supreme Lord can
understand all these explanations by the mercy of the Lord.

The Lord existed before the material Creation; therefore the material
ingredients and Nature and the living entities all emanated from Him, and
again after dissolution they rest in Him. When the Creation is correct it is
maintained by Him; at the same time, whatever manifestation we see, that
is only a transformation of the external energy. When the external energy is
withdrawn by the Supreme Lord, then everything enters into Him. In the
first verse of Ahameva, the word, Aham, I, is mentioned three times. That is
to stress that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is full with all opulences.
For anyone, therefore, who cannot understand or does not believe in the
transcendental Nature and Form of the Supreme Lord, and who says He is
without any Form—Aham is stated three times just to chastise him.

The Lord possesses His internal energy, besides His external, marginal and
relative energies, as well as the manifestation of His cosmic world and the
living entities. The external energy is manifested by the qualitative modes,
or gunas, of material Nature. One who can understand the nature of the living
entity in the Spiritual World can actually understand Vedyam, or perfect
knowledge. One cannot understand the Supreme Lord simply by seeing the
material energy and the conditioned soul. But when one is in perfect knowlThe Srimad Bhagwatam 205

edge, then he is free from the influence of the external energy. Just as the Moon
is the reflection of the Sun, and without the existence of the Sun the Moon
cannot illuminate, so this material cosmic manifestation is something like
the reflection of the Spiritual World.

When one is actually liberated from the spell of the external energy, he
can understand the constitutional nature of the Supreme Lord. Devotional
service to the Lord is the only means for attaining Him. And this devotional
service of the Lord can be accepted by everyone and anyone, in any country,
in any atmosphere, and under any circumstance. Devotional Service is above
the four principles of religiousness, or above the understanding of liberation.
Even the preliminary process of executing devotional service is transcendental
to the highest subject matter of liberation in the ordinary course of religiousness.

One should, therefore, approach a bona fide Spiritual Master, irrespective
of caste, creed, color, country and place, and he must hear from that bona
fide Spiritual Master everything about devotional service. The real purpose
of life is to revive our dormant love of God. That is our ultimate necessity.
How that love of God can be achieved is explained in the Srimad Bhagwatam.
There is theoretical knowledge and specific, or realized knowledge. The perfect,
realized knowledge, is obtained in realization of the teaching received from
the Spiritual Master.
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

  
   

WW! WI =

mh.

Why Study the Vedanta Sutra?

Knowledge means information gathered from the Scriptures, and science
means practical realization of the knowledge gathered from the Scriptures.
It is scientific knowledge when it is gathered from the Scriptures through
the practical application of the bona fide Spiritual Master, but when interpreted by mental concoction it is personal. By scientific understanding of the information from the Scripture, through the bona fide Spiritual Master, one learns,
by one’s own realization, each actual conception of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. The transcendental Form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is different from material manifestation and different from the reactions of
matter. Therefore, without scientific understanding of the Spiritual Form of
the Personality of Godhead one becomes an impersonalist. The sunshine is
itself an illumination, but that illumination is different from the Sun. Yet
the Sun and the sunshine are not differently situated; without the Sun there
is no sunshine, and without the sunshine there is no Sun.

Unless one is freed from the influence of material energy, one cannot

206
Why Study the Vedantra Sutra? 207

understand the Supreme Lord and His different energies. One who is captivated by the spell of material energy cannot understand the Spiritual Form
of the Supreme Lord. Unless there is realization of the transcendental Form of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no question of love of Godhead. Without
realization of the transcendental Form of the Supreme Lord, love of Godhead is fictitious, and without realization of love of Godhead there is no perfection of human life. Such realization of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is as follows: it is just like the five gross elements of Nature, namely earth,
water, fire, air and ether: they are both within and without all living beings
in this world. Similarly, those who are devotees of the Supreme Lord
can realize the Personality of Godhead both inside and outside this existence.

Pure devotees know very well that they are meant to serve the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and all things that exist are the means for service to
the Supreme Lord. Because a devotee has been blessed by the Supreme within
the core of his heart, therefore, wherever he looks, he can see the Supreme
Lord and nothing more. Srimad Bhagwatam confirms this type of relationship
between the devotee and the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the Eleventh
Canto, Second Chapter, as follows: “For a person whose heart is always tied
to the Lotus Feet of the Supreme Lord by the rope of love of Godhead, the
Lord does not leave him even if remembrance is not very carefully done; such
a person is called a first class devotee.” An example of this is described in the
Bhagavata Tasumskunda: The Gopis were assembled for the Rasa Dance with
Krishna, but Krishna left them, and so the assembled Gopis began to chant
the Holy Name of Krishna. They became overwhelmed with madness, and
began to inquire from the flowers and creepers in the forest about Krishna,
Who is compared with the sky and Who is situated everywhere.

Study of Bhagwatam, therefore, means to be informed about our eternal
relationship with the Supreme Lord, the procedure for how to regain Him,
and the ultimate realization, which is love of Godhead.

Lord Chaitanya next explained to Prakasananda Saraswati how to achieve
the Supreme Personality of Godhead by devotional service. He quoted in this
connection a verse from Srimad Bhagwatam, from the Eleventh Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, in which the Lord says He can be realized only through
devotional service, with faith and the love of the devotee, and it is devotional
service only which purifies the heart of the devotee and elevates him into the
ultimate realization of faith and service unto the Supreme Lord. Even though
he is born of a low family such as a Chandala—one who eats dogs—yet by reali208 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

zation of the Supreme stage of love of Godhead one becomes full with transcendental symptoms.

These symptoms are described in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Eleventh Canto,
Third Chapter, as follows: “When devotees discuss the subject of the Supreme
Lord, Who can cleanse the heart of a devotee from all kinds of sinful reaction, they become overwhelmed with ecstasies of different symptoms, on
account of their devotional service; and, as such, when they chant the Holy Name
of the Supreme Lord, due to their spontaneous attachment for Him, they
sometimes cry, sometimes laugh, sometimes dance, sometimes sing, without
caring for any social convention.”

We should understand, therefore, that Srimad Bhagwatam is the real explanasion of the Brahma Sutra, and it is compiled by the Author Himself. In the
Guru Purana it is said: “The Srimad Bhagwatam is the actual explanation of
Brahma Sutra, and is a further explanation of Mahabarata. It is the explanation
of the Gayatri Mantra and the essence of all Vedic knowledge. This Srimad
Bhagwatam contains 18,000 verses, and is known as the explanation of all Vedic
literature.” In the First Canto of Srimad Bhagwatam there is an enquiry by the
sages of Naimisharanya to Suta Goswami, on how to know the essence of
Vedic literature. In answer to the enquiry, Suta Goswami presented Srimad
Bhagwatam as the essence of all the Vedas and histories and other Vedic literature.
In the Twelfth Canto, Thirteenth Chapter of Srimad Bhagwatam, it is clearly
stated the Srimad Bhagwatam is the essence of all Vedanta knowledge, and one
who relishes the knowledge from the Srimad Bhagwatam has no taste for studying any other literature. In the very beginning of Srimad Bhagwatam, the meaning and purpose of the Gayatri Mantra is also described: “I am offering my
obeisances unto the Supreme Truth.” This is the first introductory verse on
the Supreme Truth, described in the Bhagwatam as the Source of creation,
maintenance, and dissolution of the cosmic manifestation.

Obeisances unto the Personality of Godhead, Vasudeva, directly indicate.
Lord Sri Krishna, Who is the Divine Son of Vasudeva and Devaki. The fact
will be more explicitly presented later in the text of the Srimad Bhagwatam,
by the direct statement of the Author, in His assertion that Sri Krishna is the
Original Personality of Godhead, and all others are either His direct or indirect
plenary portions, or portions of the portion. Srila Jiva Goswami has later on
still more explicitly developed this subject matter in his Krishna Sandarva, and
Brahmaji, the original living being, has explained the subject of Sri Krishna
substantially in his treatise, called Brahma Samhita. In the Samveda Upanishad
it is also said that Lord Sri Krishna is the Divine Son of Devaki.
Why Study the Vedantra Sutra? 209

Therefore, in this prayer of the Author of Bhagwatam, the first proposition is that Lord Sri Krishna is the Primeval Lord, and if any transcendental
nomenclature for the Absolute Personality of Godhead has to be understood,
it must be the Name indicated by the word Krishna, the All-attractive. In
the Bhagavad Gita in many passages the Lord has affirmed Himself as the
Original Personality of Godhead, and it is confirmed by Arjuna, with the
authorized statements of great sages like Narada, Vyasa, and many others.
In the Padma Puranam also it is said that, of innumerable Names of the Lord,
the Name of Krishna is the principal Name. Therefore, although Vasudeva
indicates the plenary portion of the Personality of Godhead, and although
all the different Forms of the Lord are identical with Vasudeva, in this text
Vasudeva is principally meant to indicate the Divine Son of Vasudeva and
Devaki. Sri Krishna is always meditated upon by the Paramhansas, or the most
perfect of the renounced order of life. This Vasudeva, or Lord Sri Krishna,
is the Cause of all causes. Everything that exists is an emanation from the
Lord, and how this so happens is explained in later chapters of Srimad Bhagwatam.

The Bhagwat Puranam (Srimad Bhagwatam) is described by Mahaprabhu
Sri Chaitanya as the spotless Puranam, because It contains the transcendental
narration of the Personality of Godhead Sri Krishna. The history of Srimad
Bhagwatam is also very glorious. It was compiled by Sri Vyasadeva from His
mature experience of transcendental knowledge under the instruction of Sri
Naradaji, His Sprirtual Master. Vyasadeva compiled all the Vedic literature,
namely the four divisions of the Vedas, the Vedanta Sutra or Brahma Sutras,
the Puranas, and the Mahabarata. But He was still not delighted in His mind.
This was observed by His Spiritual Master, and thus Narada advised Him
to write on the transcendental activities of the Lord, Sri Krishna. The transcendental activities of Lord Sri Krishna are described specifically in the Tenth
Canto of the Book, which is considered to be the substance. But, in order to
reach the substance of the Tenth Canto, one has to approach gradually by
developed knowledge of the categories.

Generally, a philosophical mind is inquisitive to know what is the Origin
of all creations. He sees the night sky and naturally asks what are the stars,
how are they situated, who lives there, and so on. All these inquiries are quite
natural for a human being, because he has a more developed consciousness
than the animals. And to answer at once such a sincere inquirer, the Author
of the Srimad Bhagwatam says that the Lord is the Origin of all creations. He
is not only the Creator, but He is also the Maintainer of the cosmic situation,
210 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

and He is also the Destroyer. The manifested Cosmic Nature is created at a
certain period by the will of the Lord, it is maintained for some time, and
then it is annihilated by His Will; and as such He is the Supreme Will behind
all these activities.

There are atheists of various categories who do not believe in the conception of a Creator, but that is due only to their poor fund of knowledge.
The modern scientist has created a sputnik, and by some arrangement or other
the sputnik is thrown into outer space to fly on for some time at the control
of a scientist who is far away from the flying sputniks. All the Universes,
with innumerable planets within them, are similar to the sputniks, and are
controlled by the Personality of Godhead.

In the Vedic literature it is said that the Absolute Truth, the Personality
of Godhead, is the Chief amongst the living personalities. All living beings,
from the first created being, Brahmaji, down to the smallest ant, are all individual living beings. And, above Brahmaji, there are many other living beings
with individual capacities, and the Personality of Godhead is also a similar
living being, as individual as the other living beings. But the Supreme Lord,
or the Supreme Living Being, has the greatest mind, with the supermost
inconceivable energies of different varieties. If a man’s mind can produce a
sputnik, we can very easily imagine that minds higher than man’s can produce
similar other wonderful things far superior to the man-made sputniks. A
reasonable person will easily accept this argument, but there are stubborn,
obstinate ones who may not believe in these reasonable statements.

But Srila Vyasadeva at once accepts the Supreme Mind as the Parameswara,
the Supreme Controller. He proposes to offer His respectful obeisances unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And that Parameswara is Sri Krishna,
as is stated in the Bhagavad Gita and all other Scriptures delivered by Srila
Vyasadeva, and specifically in the Srimad Bhagwatam. In the Bhagavad Gita
the Lord says that there is no other Paratattwa (Summum bonum) than Himself.
Therefore, the Author at once worships the Paratattwa, Sri Krishna, Whose
transcendental activities are described in the Tenth Canto.

Unscrupulous persons go at once to the Tenth Canto, and especially the
five chapters where a description of the Lord’s Rasa Dance is kindly given.
This portion of the Srimad Bhagwatam, however, is the most confidential
part of the great literature. Unless one has thoroughly accomplished himself
in the transcendental knowledge of the Lord, one is sure to misunderstand the
Lord’s worshippable transcendental Pastimes in the form of Rasa Dance, and
His love affairs with the Gopis. The subject matter is highly spiritual and techWhy Study the Vedantra Sutra? 211

nical, and only liberated persons who have gradually attained to the stage of
Paramhansa, as referred to before, can transcendentally relish the worshippable
Rasa Dance.

Srila Vyasadeva, therefore, gives us the chance for gradual development
of spiritual realization before we can actually relish the essence of the Pastimes
of the Lord, He therefore purposely invokes the Gayatri Mantra, “Dheemahi.”
This Gayatri Mantra is meant for the spiritually advanced people. When one
has attained success in the matter of chanting the Gayatri Mantra he can enter
into the transcendental position of the Lord. One must acquire the Brahminical
qualities, or be perfectly situated in the quality of goodness of the modes of
material Nature, in order to chant the Gayatri Mantra successfully, and then
attain to the stage of transcendentally realizing the Lord, His Name, His Fame,
His Qualities, etc. Srimad Bhagwatam is the narration of the Swarupa or Form
of the Lord, manifested by His internal potency ; and this potency is distingushed
from the external potency, which has manifested the cosmic world which is
within our experience. Srila Vyasadeva makes a clear distinction between the
two in the Ist verse of the First Chapter.

He says there that the manifestation of the internal potency is factual reality,
whereas the external manifested energy in the form of material existence is
temporary and illusory, no more real than the mirage in the desert. In the
mirage of the desert there is no actual water. By the interaction of something
else there is the appearance of water. Real water is somewhere else. Similarly,
the manifestive cosmic Creation appears like reality, but the true reality, of
which this is but a reflection only, is somewhere else in the Spiritual World,
in which there are no mirages. Absolute Truth is there, and not here. Here
everything is relative truth, one seeming truth depending on another. This
cosmic Creation is an interactory resultant of the three modes of Nature, and
the temporary manifestations are so created as to present an illusion of reality
to the bewildered mind of the conditioned soul, appearing as so many species
of life, including the higher demigods like Brahma, Indra, Chandra, etc. In
fact there is no reality in the manifested world, but it appears so on account of
the True Reality in the Spiritual World, where the Personality of Godhead
eternally exists with His transcendental paraphernalia.

The chief engineer of a complicated construction does not personally take
part in the construction, but it is he only who knows all the nooks and corners
of the construction, because everything is done by his direction only. He knows
everything about the construction directly and indirectly. Similarly, the
Personality of Godhead, Who is the Supreme Engineer of this cosmic Crea212 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

tion, knows very well what is happening in the nooks and corners of the cosmic
Creation, although the things are apparently done by someone else. From
Brahma down to the insignificant ant, nobody is independent in material
Creation, and everywhere there is the Hand of the Supreme Lord. All material
elements as well as spiritual sparks are but emanations from Him only. And
whatever is created in this material world is but the interaction of the two
energies, material and spiritual, or the Absolute Truth, the Personality of
Godhead, Sri Krishna (Vasudeva).

A living entity called a chemist can manufacture water in the chemical
laboratory by mixing hydrogen and oxygen gases, but in reality the living
entity works in the laboratory under the direction of the Supreme Lord, and
the materials with which the chemist works are also supplied by the Lord.
As such, the Lord knows everything directly and indirectly, and He is cognizant
of all the minute details of everything, and He is fully independent. He is
compared with the mine of gold, and the cosmic creations in different forms
are compared with the gold rings and necklaces, etc. The gold ring and the
gold necklace are qualitatively one with the gold in the mine, but quantitatively the gold in the mine and the gold in the earring or necklace are different.
The whole philosophy of the Absolute Truth is, therefore, that It is simultaneously one and different. Nothing is absolutely equal to the Absolute Truth,
but at the same time nothing is independent of the Absolute Truth.

Conditioned souls, beginning from Brahma, the engineer of this particular
Universe, down to the insignificant ant, are all creating something, but none of
them are independent of the Supreme Lord. The materialist wrongly thinks
that there is no Creator save and except his own good self, and this is called
Maya, or illusion. On account of his poor fund of knowledge the materialist
cannot see beyond the purview of his imperfect senses, and thus he thinks that
matter automatically takes its own shape without a conscious background.
This is refuted in the 1st verse of the Bhagwatam by Srila Vyasadeva, Who is
a liberated soul and compiled this book of authority after His mature spiritual
perfection. The Complete Whole, or the Absolute Truth, being the Source
of everything, nothing is independent of the Whole Body. Any action and
reaction on the body becomes a cognizable fact to the embodied Whole.
Similarly, if the whole Creation is the Body of the Absolute Whole, then
nothing is unknown to the Absolute, directly or indirectly.

In the Sruti Mantra it is also stated that the Absolute Whole, or Brahman,
is the Ultimate Source of everything. Everything emanates from Him, and
everything is maintained by Him, and at the end everything enters into Him
Why Study the Vedantra Sutra? 213

only. That is the law of Nature. In the Smriti Mantra also the same thing is
confirmed. It is said there that at the beginning of Brahma’s millennium the
Source from which everything emanates—and, at the end of that millennium,
the reservoir that everything enters into—is the Absolute Truth, or Brahman.
Material scientists haphazardly take it for granted that the ultimate source of
all the planetary systems is the Sun. But they are unable to explain the source
of the Sun. Herein the ultimate Source is explained. According to the Vedic
literature, Brahma is the creator of this Universe, and yet he also had to meditate
to get inspiration for such creation. Therefore Brahma, or the Sun, is not the
ultimate creator.

It is stated here in the 1st verse of Srimad Bhagwatam that Brahma was
taught the Vedic knowledge by the Personality of Godhead. One may argue
that Brahma is the original living being within this Universe, and who could
then give him inspiration, as there was no second being at that time? In the
Ist verse of Srimad Bhagwatam it is said that the Supreme Lord inspired the
secondary creator, Brahma, who then could go on with the creative functions.
What we have already mentioned above about the supervising engineer is
applicable here. The Real Mind behind all creative agents is the Absolute
Personality of Godhead, Sri Krishna. In the Bhagavad Gita Lord Sri Krishna
has Personally admitted that it is He only Who superintends over the creative
energy, Prakriti, or the sum total of matter. Sri Vyasadeva, therefore, worships neither Brahma nor the Sun, but the Supreme Lord Who guides both
Brahma and the Sun in their different activities of creation.

In the 1st verse of Srimad Bhagwatam the particular Sanscrit words Avijna
and Swarat are significant. These two words distinguish the Lord from all
other living entities. No living entity other than the Supreme Being, the
Absolute Personality of Godhead, is either Avijna or Swarat—i.e., none of the
entities are either fully cognizant, or fully independent. Everyone has to learn
from the superior all about knowledge. Even Brahma, who is the first living
being within this material world, has to meditate upon the Supreme Lord and
take help from Him in order to create. When Brahma, or the Sun, cannot
create anything without acquiring required knowledge from the superior,
then what to speak of the material scientists who are fully dependent on so
many things? Jagadish Chandra Bose, Isaac Newton, Prof. Einstein, etc. of the
modern scientists who may be boastful of their respective creative energies,
were also dependent on the Supreme Lord for so many things. After all,
the respective, highly intelligent brains of these gentlemen were certainly not
the products of any human being. The brain is created by another agent, other
214 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

than the celebrated scientists themselves. If brains like that of Jagadish Bose
or of Isaac Newton could have been manufactured by any human being,
then they would have produced many such brains instead of eulogizing the
brains of these scientists. Even the scientists could not manufacture a similar
brain, what to speak of other foolish atheists who defy the authority of the
Lord?

Even the Mayavadi impersonalists who flatter themselves that they have
become the Lord are not Avijna or Swarat, fully cognizant or fully independent.
Such Mayavadi monists undergo a severe process of austerity and penances
to acquire the knowledge of becoming one with the Lord, but ultimately
they become dependent on some rich follower who supplies them the requisite
paraphernalia to conduct a great establishment in the form of monastery and
temples. Atheists like Ravana and Hiranya Kashipu had to undergo severe
penances before they could flout the authority of the Lord, and ultimately
they were so helpless that they could not save themselves when the Lord
appeared before them as cruel Death. The same is applicable to the modern
atheists also who dare to flout the authority of the Lord. Such atheists will
be dealt similar awards as were meted out to the past great atheists like Ravana
and Hiranya Kashipu. History repeats itself and so what was accorded in the
past, will recur again and again whenever there is such necessity. Whenever
there is negligence of the authority of the Lord, the penalty by the laws of
Nature is always there.

That the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, is All-perfect is
confirmed in all Sruti Mantras. It is said in the Sruti Mantras that the Allperfect Lord glanced over matter, and thus He created all living beings. The
living beings are parts and parcels of the Lord, and He impregnates the vast
material Nature with the seeds of spiritual sparks, and thus the creative energies
are set in motion for so many wonderful creations. One atheist friend argued
that God is no more expert than the manufacturer of a subtle watch which
moves by delicate machineries. We had to reply to the atheist friend that
God is still a greater mechanic than the watchmaker in the sense that He creates
one machine in duplicate male and female forms. The male and female forms
of different grades of machinery go on producing innumerable quantities
of similar machines without the further attention of God. If a man could manufacture such sets of duplicate machines to produce further machines without
any attention from the original manufacturer, then of course a man could
equal the intelligence of God. But that is not possible. Each and every one of
the imperfect machines have to be handled individually by the mechanic,
Why Study the Vedantra Sutra? 215

for nobody can be equal in intelligence to God. Another Name of God is therefore Asmaurdha. Nobody is equal to or greater than Him. Everybody has his
equal or superior in intelligence, and nobody can claim that he has neither.
This fact is corroborated in the Sruti Mantras, where it is said that before the
Creation of the material Universe, there was the Lord, Who is the Master of
everyone. The Lord instructed Brahma in the Vedic knowledge. That Personality of Godhead has to be obeyed in all respects. Anybody who wants to
become free of the material entanglement must, therefore, surrender unto
Him. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad Gita also.

Unless one surrenders unto the Lotus Feet of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead it is sure and certain that one must be bewildered, even if he
happens to be a great mind. When the great minds surrender unto the Lotus
Feet of Vasudeva and know fully that Lord Vasudeva is the Cause of all causes,
as is confirmed in the Bhagavad Gita, then only can such great minds become
Mahatmas or the truly broad-minded. But such a broad-minded Mahatma is
rarely seen. Only the Mahatmas, however, can understand the Supreme Lord,
Who is the Absolute Personality of Godhead, the Primeval Cause of all creations. He is Parama, or Ultimate Truth, because all other truths are relatively
dependent on Him. And because He is the Source of everyone’s knowledge
He is omniscient, and for Him there is no illusion as there is for the relative
knower.

Some scholars of the Mayavadi school argue that Srimad Bhagwatam was
not compiled by Sri Vyasadeva, and some of them suggest that this book is
a creation in the modern age of somebody by the name of Bopedeva. Srila
Sridhar Swami, in order to refute this meaningless argument, says that there
is reference to the Bhagwatam in many other of the oldest Puranas. The first
Sloka, or verse, of the Srimad Bhagwatam is begun with the Gayatri Mantra,
and there is reference to this as the Matsya Puranam (the oldest Puranam).
In that Puranam it is said, with reference to the context of Gayatri Mantra in
the Bhagwatam, that there are many narrations of spiritual instructions, beginning with the Gayatri Mantra, and also the history of Vitrasura is in Gayatri
Mantra. Anyone who makes a gift of this great work on the full moon day,
attains to the highest perfection of life by going back to Godhead. Similarly,
there is a reference to this Bhagwatam in other Puranas where it is said that the
work consists of twelve cantos and 18,000 Slokas. In the Padma Puranam also
there is reference to the Bhagwatam, during the conversation of Goutam and
Maharaj Amburish. The king was advised therein to read regularly Srimad
Bhagwatam if he at all desired liberation from the material bondage. Under
216 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

the circumstances, there is no doubt regarding the authority of Srimad Bhagwatam Puranam. Within five hundred years from the present era, many scholars,
even after the time of Lord Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, have made elaborate
commentaries on the Bhagwatam Puranam with unique scholarship; and the
serious student will do well to make an attempt to go through them, to relish
more happily the transcendental messages from the Bhagwatam.

Srila Viswanath Chakravarty Thakur specifically deals with the original
and pure sex psychology (Adirasa) devoid of all mundane inebriety. The
whole material world is turning on the basic principle of sex life. In the modern human
civilization, sex life is the central point of all activities. Wherever we may
turn our face we see a great prominence of sex life. Therefore, sex life is not
unreal. Its true reality is experienced in the Spiritual World. Material sex life
is but a perverted reflection of the original. The original, therefore, is in the
Absolute Truth; and the Absolute Truth cannot be impersonal and have a
sense of pure sex life. The impersonal monist philosophy has given an indirect
impetus to the abominable mundane sex life, because it has given too much
stress to the impersonality of the Ultimate Truth. The result is that men who
lack knowledge have accepted the perverted sex life as all-in-all without any
information about the actual spiritual form of sex. There is a distinction between
sex life in the diseased condition of material life and that in the spiritual existence. The Srimad Bhagwatam will gradually elevate the unbiased reader to the

 

highest perfectional stage of transcendence, above the three modes of material
activities, namely fruitive actions. speculative philosophy, and worshipping
the functional deities as they are inculcated in the Vedic verses.

Srimad Bhagwatam is the embodiment of devotional service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krishna. It is therefore situated in a superior position
over all other Vedic literature.

The term religiousness includes four primary subjects: namely, (1) pious
activities, (2) economic development, (3) satisfaction of the senses, and (4)
liberation from the material bondage. Religious life is distinguished from the
irreligious life of barbarism, and human life begins from the life of religiousness. The four principles of animal life—eating, sleeping, defending and mating
—are common both to the animals and the human beings. Religion is the
extra concern of the human being, and without religion the so-called human
life is no better than that of the animal. Therefore, in real human society there
is some form of religion aiming at self realization, with reference to the eternal
relationship with God.

In the lower stage of human civilization there is always a competition in
Why Study the Vedanta Sutra? 217

lording it over material Nature; or in other words, there is a continuous rivalry
for satisfying the senses. And, driven by this consciousness of sense gratification, religiousness is performed. Pious activities or religious functions are
performed with an aim generally for some material gain. If such material gain
is obtainable in another way, then the so-called religiousness is neglected, as
we can see in the modern human civilization. The economic desires being
seemingly fulfilled in another way, nobody is interested in religion now. The
church, mosque, or the temple is practically always a vacant place, and people
are more interested in the factories, shops, and cinemas than in the religious
places formerly erected by the forefathers of different paths of religiousness.
This proves definitely that religiousness is performed for economic development, and economic development is needed for sense gratification. And where
one is baffled in the matter of sense gratification, he takes to the cause of salvation in order to become one with the Supreme Whole. Therefore, all these
stages are different examples of the same aim of life, namely sense gratification.

In the Vedas, the above-mentioned four activities are prescribed in a regulative way so that there may not be any undue competition for the purpose
of sense gratification. But Srimad Bhagwatam is transcendental to all these
sense gratifying activities of the material world. It is purely transcendental
literature, understandable by a particular class of men known as devotees of
the Lord, who are above the competitive field of sense gratification. In the
material world there is keen competition between the animals, between men,
communities, or even nations in this sense gratifying activity, but the devotees
of the Lord are above this. Devotees have nothing to compete for with the
materialists because they are on the path back to Godhead, where everything
is eternal, full, blissful. Such transcendentalists are a hundred per cent nonenvious, and therefore pure in heart. In the material world everyone is envious
of everyone and therefore there is competition. But the transcendentalists or
devotees of the Lord are not only freed from all material enviousness, but
they are kind to everyone, endeavoring to establish a competitionless society,
with God in the center.

The socialist idea of society is artificially competitionless, because even
in the socialistic state there is competition for the post of dictator. The fact is,
therefore, that the state of sense gratification is the order of materialistic life,
take it either from the Vedas or from the common human activities. As
mentioned above, there are three divisions of the Vedas, namely the stage of
fruitive activities for getting advancement to better planets like heaven, etc.
And, above this, there are the activities of worshipping different demigods
218 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

with the same intentions—of getting advanced into the different planets of the
different types of demigods. And, lastly, there are the activities of reaching
the Absolute Truth in His impersonal Feature, to become One with Him.

The impersonal aspect of the Absolute Truth is not the last word. Above
the impersonal Feature is the Paramatma, or Supersoul, aspect, and above that
there is the Personal quality of the Absolute Truth. Srimad Bhagwatam gives
us information about the Absolute Truth in His Personal quality, beyond the
impersonal aspect. It is therefore greater than the topics of impersonal philosophical speculations, and as such, Srimad Bhagwatam is given higher status
than the Jnanakanda division of the Vedas. It is higher than the Karmakanda
division as well as the Jnanakanda division and it is above the Upashanakanda
division, because Srimad Bhagwatam recommends the worship of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Sri Krishna, the Divine Son of Vasudeva. In the
Karmakanda of the Vedas there is competition for supremacy in reaching the
heavenly planets for better sense gratification. And the same competition is
there in the Jnanakanda or Upashanakandas. But Srimad Bhagwatam is above
all of them because It aims at the Supreme Truth, the Substance or the Root
of all categories. In other words, from Srimad Bhagwatam we can know the
Substance as well as the relativities in the true sense and prespective. The
Substance is the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
all emanations from Him are relativities in different forms of energies. The
living entities are also related to all different types of His energies, and therefore nothing is different from the Substance. But, at the same time, the energies
are different from the Substance. This concept is not self-contradictory.
Srimad Bhagwatam explicitly deals with this simultaneously one and different
philosophy of the Vedanta Sutra, which begins with the Janmadyasya Sutra.

Such knowledge of the simultaneously one and different nature of the
Absolute Truth is really for the well-being of the knower. Otherwise the mental
speculators mislead the people wrongly establishing the energy as Absolute.
When it is understood, the truth becomes more pleasing than the imperfect
concept of monism or dualism. Development of this consciousness leads one
at once to the stage of freedom from the threefold miseries. The threefold
miseries are I. in relation to the body and the mind, 2. in relation to our dealings with other beings, and 3. in relation to the acts of providence, over which
we have no control.

Srimad Bhagwatam begins from the surrender of the living entity unto
the Absolute Person, with clear consciousness of the devotee’s oneness with the Absolute, and, at the same time, his awareness of his eternal position of servitorship toward
Why Study the Vedanta Sutra? 219

the Lord. In the material conception of his life he thinks of himself falsely as
the lord of all he surveys, and therefore he is always troubled with the abovementioned threefcid miseries of life. But, as soon as he comes to know his
real position of transcendental servitude, he at once becomes freed from all
the above-mentioned miseries. The servitor position of the living being is
wasted in the material concept of his life. With a false sense of overlordship,
the living being must offer his service to the relative energies of matter. When
this servitorship is transferred unto the Lord in pure consciousness of spiritual
identity, the living entity at once becomes freed from the encumbrances
of material affliction.

Over and above this, Srimad Bhagwatam is the Personal commentary on
the Vedanta Sutra by the great Author Himself—and that also in the mature
stage of His spiritual realization, through the mercy of Narada. Sri Vyasadeva
is the authorized incarnation of Narayan, the Personality of Godhead. Therefore, there is no question about His Authority. He is the Author of all other
Vedic literature; but, surpassing all of It, He recommends the study of Srimad
Bhagwatam. In other Puranas there are different methods of worshipping the
demigods, but in the Bhagwatam only the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is mentioned. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Whole Body, and
the demigods are the different parts of the body. As such, by worshipping
the Supreme Lord there is no need to worship the demigods, because the
Supreme Lord is at once fixed in the heart. Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu has
recommended this Srimad Bhagwatam as the spotless Puranam, as distinguished from all other Puranas.

The mode of receiving the transcendental message is to get it through
the ears by submissiveness. No challenging mode can help the receiver in
getting or realizing the transcendental message. Therefore, in the Ist verse
of Srimad Bhagwatam, one particular word is used for our proper guidance.
This particular word is Shushrusu: one must be anxious to hear about the
transcendental message. And this qualification of hearing with interest is the
prime qualification for assimilating transcendental knowledge.

Unfortunately, some persons are not interested in giving patient hearing
to the message of Srimad Bhagwatam. The process is simple, but the application is difficult. Unfortunate persons will find enough time to hear ordinary
social, political, and all sorts of idle talks, but when they are invited to attend
a meeting of the devotees assembled to hear Srimad Bhagwatam, the unfortunate
creatures will either be reluctant to attend such a meeting, or they will indulge
in hearing the portion they are unfit to enter into. Professional readers of the
220 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Bhagwatam indulge in the confidential topics of the Pastimes of the Supreme
Lord, which seemingly appear to be sex literature. Srimad Bhagwatam is meant
to be heard from the beginning, and the class of persons who are fit to assimilate
it is also mentioned in Srimad Bhagwatam I/1/2: A bona fide audience for hearing the Srimad Bhagwatam is generated after many pious deeds. But an intelligent person, by thoughtful discretion, can believe in the assurance of the
great sage Vyasadeva, and give patient hearing to the message of Srimad
Bhagwatam, in order to realize directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
And without undergoing the different Vedic stages, one can at once be lifted
to the position of Paramhansa, simply by agreeing to receive patiently the
message of Srimad Bhagwatam. The sages at Naimisharanya confirmed before
Suta Goswami that they were increasing in their intense desire to understand
the Srimad Bhagwatam. They were hearing from Suta Goswami about Krishna,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They were never satiated by such discussion, because persons who are really attached to Krishna never cease to
want to hear more and more about Krishna.

Lord Chaitanya therefore advised Prakasananda Saraswati, “Always
read Srimad Bhagwatam and try to understand each and every verse, and you
will actually understand the Brahma Sutra. You say you are very anxious about
the study of Vedanta Sutra, but you cannot understand Vedanta Sutra without
understanding Srimad Bhagwatam.” He also advised Prakasananda Saraswati
to always chant Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare
Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. “And, by doing that, very easily
you will be liberated. And after liberation you'll be eligible to achieve the
highest goal of life, love of Godhead.”

The Lord then recited many verses from authoritative Scriptures like
Srimad Bhagavad Gita and Srimad Bhagwatam, and Nrishingha Tapani. He
quoted a verse from Bhagavad Gita, Eighteenth Chapter, 54th verse, that when
one actually becomes self-realized, knowing he is Brahman, he becomes happy
and joyful, and has no more cause for lamentation and hankering. Such a
person sees all living entities on an equal level, and he becomes a pure devotee
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Similarly, in the Nrishingha Tapani
it is said that when a person is actually liberated, then he can understand the
transcendental Pastimes of the Supreme Lord, and thus become engaged in
His devotional service. He also quoted a verse from the Second Canto of
Srimad Bhagwatam, in which Sukadeva Goswami admits that, although he was
elevated to the liberated stage and free from the clutches of Maya, still, he was
attracted by the transcendental Pastimes of Krishna. And, as such, he studied
Why Study the Vedanta Sutra? 221

Srimad Bhagwatam from his great father Vyasadeva.

He also quoted another sloka from Srimad Bhagwatam, Third Canto,
Fifteenth Chapter, about the Kumaras. When the Kumaras entered the temple
of the Lord they were attracted by the odor of flowers and tulsi leaves offered
to the Lotus Feet of the Supreme Lord with pulp of sandalwood, And, simply
being incensed by the aroma of such flowers and tulsi, their minds became
inclined to the service of the Supreme Lord, although they were already
liberated souls. Therefore, according to Srimad Bhagwatam, First Canto,
Seventh Chapter, even if one is a liberated soul and is actually free from material
contamination, still he becomes attracted to the devotional service of the
Supreme Lord without any cause, and without being hampered by any material
propensities. God is so attractive—therefore He is called Krishna.

Lord Chaitanya was discussing the Atmarama verse from Srimad Bhagwatam with Prakasananda Saraswati. His admirer, the Maharastrian Brahmin
related in the assembly that the Lord has already explained the verse in 64
different ways. All the people assembled there were very eager to hear again
from the Lord about the different versions of the Atmarama Sloka, and as they
were so eager, Lord Chaitanya explained the Atmarama Sloka again, in the
same way that He had explained it before to Sanatan Goswami. All the people
assembled there heard the explanation of the Atmarama Sloka from the Supreme
Lord, and they were amazed and considered that the Lord was nobody else
than Sri Krishna Himself.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

    
  
 

ay

Wig.
A =
“4g =
<=>

Ii\\

Talks with
Sarbabhouma Battacharya

When Lord Chaitanya met Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya at Jagannath Puri,
Bhattacharya, as the great logician of the day, also wanted to teach Him
Vedanta. Bhattacharya was an elderly man of the age of Lord Chaitanya’s
father, and therefore he took compassion on the young Sannyasi; he requested
that He should learn Vedanta Sutra from him, otherwise it would be difficult
to continue as a:young Sannyasi. When the Lord agreed to learn Vedanta
philosophy from Bhattacharya, he began to teach Him in the temple of
Jagannath. Bhattacharya spoke to the Lord about Vedanta Sutra continually
for seven days, and the Lord silently heard him without speaking a word.
On the eighth day of teaching, Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya enquired from
the Lord, “You are hearing Vedanta Sutra from me for the last week, but
You do not inquire or say anything as to whether I am explaining it nicely.
So I cannot tell whether You understand me or not.”

The Lord replied as follows: “I am a fool, I have no study of Vedanta
Sutra, but you asked Me to hear you, and therefore I am trying to hear you.

222
Talks with Sarbabhouma Battacharya 223

You said that it is the duty of every Sannyasi to hear Vedanta Sutra, so I simply
hear; but the meaning which you create—that I cannot understand.” In other
words, the Lord was explaining that in the Mayavadi Sampradaya there
are many so-called Sannyasis who are even illiterate and have not sufficient
intelligence but just as a matter of formality they hear Vedanta Sutra from their
Spiritual Master, although they do not understand anything. So far as Lord
Chaitanya was concerned, He did not understand the explanation of Bhattacharya because He did not approve of the explanation of Mayavadi philosophy.

When He said that He was an uneducated fool Who could not follow,
Bhattacharya replied to Him, “If You do not follow what I am saying, how
is it that You do not inquire, but simply sit down silently? It appears that You
do have something to say about my explanation.”

Then the Lord replied, “My dear sir, so far as the Vedanta Sutra or the
codes of the Vedanta are concerned, I can understand the meaning very nicely,
but the explanation which you are promoting is not understandable by Me.
There is nothing difficult about the meaning of the original codes of Vedanta
Sutra. But the way you were explaining them appears to be obscuring the real
meaning of the codes. You do not elucidate the direct meaning of the Vedanta
Sutra, but you imagine something and hide the true meaning. I think you
have a particular doctrine, and you are trying to expound it through the
codes.”

According to Mukti Upanishad, there are 108 Upanishads. Some of them
are: I. Iso, 2. Kena, 3. Katha, 4. Prasna, 5. Mund, 6. Mandukya, 7. Tittirih,
8. Aitriya, 9. Chhandogya, 10. Brihadaranoyakam, 11. Brahma, 12. Jaivalya,
13. Javala, 14. Svetsva, 15. Hansa, 16. Arunih, 17. Garbha, 18. Narayana,
etc. These 108 Upanishads contain all knowledge about the Absolute Truth.
Sometimes people inquire about the meaning of these 108 prayer beads, but
we think because there are 108 Upanishads which contain full knowledge
of the Absolute Truth, therefore 108 beads are accepted. Sometimes, on the
other hand, the Vaishnava transcendentalists think there are 108 companions
of Lord Krishna in His Rasa Dance, and therefore 108 beads are accepted.

Lord Chaitanya protested against misinterpretations of the statements of
the Upanishads, and so any explanation which did not follow the direct meaning
of the Upanishad He did not accept. The direct interpretation is called
Abhidavritti, whereas the indirect method is called Lakshnavritti. The indirect
meaning, or Lakshnavritti, serves no purpose. There are four kinds of understanding, called: (1) direct understanding, (2) hypothetical understanding,
224 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

(3) historical understanding, and (4) sound understanding. Out of these four
kinds of understanding, to receive knowledge by sound understanding, the
understanding from the Vedic Scriptures (which are the sound representation
of the Absolute Truth), is the best. The traditional Vedic students accept
this sound understanding as the best.

For example, the stool and bone of any living entity is considered the
most impure thing by the Vedic literature; but, at the same time, the Vedic
literature asserts that cow dung and the conch shell are the purest of all. Apparently these statements are contradictory, but because cow dung and the
conch shell have been called pure in the Vedic literature, although they are
the stool and bone of living entities, they are accepted as pure without any
argument. They cannot be changed by our mundane arguments added to the
statements of the Vedas. If we want to understand the statements by indirect
interpretation under some hypothesis, then we challenge the evidential quality
of the Vedic statement. In other words, Vedic statements cannot be accepted
by our imperfect interpretation; they must be accepted as they are. Otherwise there is no authority in the Vedic statement.

According to Lord Chaitanya, persons who try to always find some
interpretation of the Vedic statements are not at all intelligent. They mislead
their followers by some innovation of their own interpretation. In India
there is a class who are known as Aryasamajist, who say that they accept only
the original Vedas and no other Vedic literature. But their purpose is only
to make their own interpretation, and according to Lord Chaitanya such
interpretation is not accepted. Neither are they Vedic. Lord Chaitanya then
said that the Vedic statements of the Upanishads are just like sunlight; as in
the sunlight everything is clear and very distinct, so the statements in the
Vedas are distinct and clear. The Mayavadi philosophers cover the sunlight
with the cloud of their misinterpretation.

He then said that all Vedic statements of the Upanishads aim at the truth,
known as Brahman. The meaning of the word Brahman is “the greatest,”
and when you speak of the greatest we must immediately understand that
greatest means the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Source of all emanations. Unless the greatest is filled with six opulences it cannot be the greatest;
therefore the greatest, with the fullness of six opulences, means the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In other words, the Supreme Brahman is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In the Bhagavad Gita also, in the Tenth Chapter,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna, is accepted as the Supreme
Talks with Sarbabhouma Battacharya 225

Brahman. The conceptions of the impersonal Brahman and the localized
Supersoul are contained within the understanding of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.

Whenever we speak of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we add the
word “Sri”: this means that He is full with six opulences, and, in other words,
He is eternally a Person. Otherwise the six opulences cannot be present in
fullness. Therefore, if we say that the Supreme Absolute Truth is impersonal,
it means that He is not a Person of this material world. To distinguish His
transcendental Body from the material body, some have explained Him as
materially impersonal. In other words, material personality has been denied
and Spiritual Personality has been established. In the Svetasvatara Upanishad,
Third Chapter, 19th verse, it has been clearly explained that the Absolute
Truth has no material legs and hands, but still He has spiritual hands by which
He accepts everything which we offer to Him. He has no material eyes, but
He has spiritual eyes by which He can see everything and anything. He has
no material ears but He can hear everything and anything. He has perfect
senses—therefore He knows past, future and present. He knows everything,
but nobody can understand Him, because by material senses He cannot be
understood. He is the Origin of all emanations and therefore He is the Supreme,
the greatest, the Personality of Godhead.

There are many such Vedic hymns which definitely establish that the
Supreme Absolute Truth is a Person, but that He is not a Person of this material
world. In the Hayasirsa Pancharatra there is a nice verse which explains that,
in each and every Upanishad the Supreme Brahman is first viewed as impersonal, but at the end there is acceptance of the Personal Form of the Supreme
Lord. Another example, in the Isa Upanishad—the 15th Mantra—runs as
follows:

Hiranmayena patrena satysya apihitam mukhm

Jat tvam pusan, apavrinu satya dharmaya dri staye
This verse indicates that everyone should be engaged in devotional service
to the Supreme Lord; “O my Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
You are the Maintainer of the whole Universe. Everyone is sustained by Your
mercy. Therefore, devotional service unto You is the true religion of life.
I am therefore engaged in such devotional service, and I expect that You will
please maintain me, and ever increasingly engage me in Your transcendental
service. For the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the eternal Form of SatChit-Ananda, and Your eftulgence is spread all over the Creation, just like the
226 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

sunshine. Where the sun disc is covered by the glaring sunshine, similarly
Your transcendental Form is covered by the Brahmajyoti. I desire to find You
within the Brahmajyoti—therefore please remove this glaring effulgence.”

In this verse of Isa Upanishad it is clearly stated that the eternal, blissful,
cognizant Form of the Supreme Lord is to be found within the glaring effulgence of Brahmajyoti. Brahmajyoti is the emanation from the Personal Body
of the Supreme Lord. Therefore the Personal Body of the Personality of
Godhead is the source of the Brahmajyoti as it is described in the Bhagavad
Gita. The impersonal Brahman is dependent on the Supreme Personality.
This is stated in the Hayasirsa Pancharatra; and, in any Upanishad or Vedic
Scripture, wherever there is talk first of the impersonal Brahman, the Supreme
Personality is finally established at the end. Just as we have quoted above from
the Isa Upanishad, the Supreme Absolute Truth is both impersonal and
Personal eternally, but His Personal aspect is more important than the impersonal concept.

The Mantra in the Taetreia Upanishad is: Yato va imani bhutani jayante.
According to this Mantra this cosmic manifestation is an emanation from the
Supreme Absolute Truth, and it rests also in the Supreme Absolute Truth.
So the Absolute Truth becomes the ablative and causative and locative Performer. Therefore, as Performer, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
These are the symptoms of Personality. This Absolute Truth being ablative
Performer of this cosmic manifestation, it is to be concluded that He has
thinking, feeling and willing. Without these three psychic symptoms there is
no possibility of such a nice arrangement and design of the cosmic manifestation. Then again He is causative: He is the Original Designer of the cosmic
manifestation. And He is locative: everything is resting in His energy. These
are the clear symptoms of His Personality.

Then again, in the Chandyago Upanishad, when the Supreme Personality
of Godhead desires to become many, He turns over the material Nature. As
it is confirmed in the Taiitariya Upanishad, “The Lord glanced over the material
Nature.” There was no existence of the cosmic manifestation before His glancing, and therefore this glancing does not mean that He has a glancing or seeing
power which is materially contaminated. His seeing power existed before the
material Creation, and therefore His body is also not material. His thinking,
feeling and acting are transcendental. In other words it is to be concluded
that the mind by which the Lord thinks, feels and wills, is transcendental;
the eyes by which He glances over the material Nature are also transcendental.
All of His senses existed before the material Creation, and so He has His tranTalks with Sarbabhouma Battacharya 22,7

scendental Body, transcendental Mind, and transcendental thinking, feeling
and willing, This conclusion is the purpose of all the Vedic literature. In all
the Upanishads, the word Brahman is found everywhere. In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Brahman, Paramatma and the Supreme Personality of Godhead are
together calculated as the Absolute Truth. Therefore the Brahman conception
and Paramatma realization also are grades or stages, and when ultimate realization is reached, that realization is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This
is the conclusion of all Vedic literature.

So, by the evidences of the different Vedic Scriptures, the Supreme Lord
Krishna is accepted as the ultimate Goal of Brahman realization. Bhagavad
Gita confirms that there is nothing superior to Krishna. The great Acharya
of Brahma’s disciplic succession, Madhva Acharya, has described—in connection with his explanation of the Vedanta Sutra—that everything can be
seen through the authorities of the Scriptures. He has quoted a verse from the
Bhobishya Purana in which it is stated that Rig Veda, Sam Veda, Atharva
Veda, Mahabharata, Pancharatracum, and the original Ramayan, are actually
evidential Vedic literature, and the Puranas which are accepted by the Vaishnavas are also accepted as evidential Vedic literature. Whatever is spoken in
that literaute should be taken without any argument as the ultimate conclusion, and in all that literature it is found that Krishna is the Supreme Personality

of Godhead.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

   

Wf =
= FOS
— ee a
ae f - fe acs
= hig M=
tm
Cy Ve
ui] fi /

Personal and

Impersonal Realization

The Puranas are called the supplementary Vedic literature, because sometimes in the original Vedas the subject matter is too difficult to be understood
by the common man. The Puranas, therefore, explain things nicely by different stories and historical incidents. So, in the Srimad Bhagwatam it is stated in
the Tenth Canto, Fourteenh Chapter, that Maharaj Nanda and the cowherd
men and inhabitants of Vrindaban generally are very fortunate because the
Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Gobhead, full of bliss, is now engaged
there in His eternal Pastimes as their Friend.

According to Svetasvatara Upanishad, the Mantra of Apanipado javano
grahita comfirms that although Brahman has no materially created hands and
legs, still He walks very stately, and He accepts everything offered to Him.
These words suggest that He has transcendental limbs of the body, and therefore He is not impersonal. The person who does not understand the Vedic
principles simply stresses the impersonal material features of the Supreme
Absolute Truth, and thus unceremoniously calls the Absolute Truth imper
228
Personal and Impersonal Realization 229

sonal. Although the impersonalist Mayavadi philosophers want to establish
the Absolute Truth as impersonal, yet the Vedic literature itself does not
confirm this. Vedic literature confirms that the Supreme Absolute has multiple
energies, and still the Mayavadi impersonalists want to establish that the
Absolute Truth has no energy. The Absolute Truth is therefore full of energy
and He is a Person. He cannot be established as impersonal.

According to the Vishnu Purana, the living entities are considered as
Kshetrajna energy. Although the living entity is part and parcel of the Supreme
Lord, and is fully cognizant, still he becomes entrapped in the material contamination, and therefore suffers all the miseries therein. Such living entities
live in different positions in proportion to their entanglement in material
Nature. The purport is that the original energy of the Supreme Lord is spiritual
and non-different from the Supreme Absolute Personality of Godhead. The
living entity is called the marginal energy of the Supreme Lord, whereas the
material energy is called inferior. On account of possessing inert and material
inebriety, the living entity, although in the marginal position, becomes entangled with the inferior energy, matter. At that time he forgets his spiritual
significance and identifies himself with the material energy and therefore becomes subjected to threefold miseries. When he is, however, free from that
material contamination, he proportionately becomes situated in different
standards of life.

According to the Vedic instruction, everyone should understand the constitutional position of the living entity, the Lord, and the material energy in
their inter-relation. First of all, one should try to understand the constitutional
position of the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead. That Supreme
Personality of Godhead has eternal, cognizant, blissful Body; His spiritual
energy is distributed as eternity, knowledge, and bliss. In His blissful identity
there is His pleasure potency, and in His eternal identity He is the Cause of
everything, and in His cognizant identity He is the Supreme Knowledge.
Krishna means that Supreme Knowledge. In other words, the Supreme
Personality of Krishna is the Reservoir of all knowledge, all pleasure, and all
eternity. That Supreme Knowledge of Krishna is exhibited in three different
energies; they are called internal energy, marginal energy, and external energy.
By internal energy, He exists in Himself with His spiritual paraphernalia, by
marginal existence He exhibits Himself as the living entities, and by His external
energy He exhibits Himself as the material energy. In each and every exhibition of His different energies there is the background of eternity, pleasure

potency, and cognizance potency.
230 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

The conditioned soul is the marginal potency, overpowered by the external
potency. When the marginal potency, however, comes under the spiritual
potency, the marginal potency becomes eligible for love of Godhead. The
Supreme Lord enjoys with six kinds of opulences and nobody can establish
that He is Formless or that He is without energy. If somebody says that, it
is completely against the Vedic instruction. Actually, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is the Master of all energies. The living entity, being an infinitesimal part and parcel, becomes overpowered by the material energy.

In the Mundaka Upanishad it is stated that two birds of the same feather
are sitting on one tree. One of them is eating the fruit of the tree, and the other
is not eating the fruit of the tree, but is witnessing the activities of the other
bird. When the bird eating the fruit of the tree looks on the other bird, he
becomes freed from all anxieties. This is the position of the infinitesimal living
entity. So long as he is forgetful of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
he is subjected to the threefold miseries; but when he looks to the Supreme
Lord, or becomes a devotee of the Supreme Lord, he becomes free from all
anxieties and miseries of material existence.

This position of the living entity means that he is eternally subordinate
to the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord is always the Master of all energies,
whereas the living entities are always under the energies of the Supreme Lord.
The living entity, although qualitatively one with the Supreme Lord, has a
tendency to lord it over the material Nature; but, being infinitesimal, the
living entity has the tendency to be controlled by material Nature. This
qualification of the living entity is called marginal potency. Because the living
entity has a tendency for being controlled by the material Nature, he cannot
at any stage of life become One with the Supreme Lord. If a living entity were
equal to the Supreme Lord then there would be no chance of his being controlled by the material energy. In Bhagavad Gita, the living entity has been
described as one of the energies of the Supreme Lord. Energy, although inseparable from the energetic, is still energy, and cannot be equal with the energetic.
In other words, the living entity is simultaneously one and different from the
Supreme Lord. The Bhagavad Gita, in the Seventh Chapter, verses 4-5, clearly
states that earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence, and false ego are
the eight different elementary energies of the Supreme Lord. All these energies
are of inferior quality, whereas the living entity has energy of superior quality.
Therefore Vedic instruction confirms the transcendental Form of the Supreme
Lord as eternal, blissful, and full of knowledge.

The conception of impersonalism is the opposite of the transformations
Personal and Impersonal Realization 231

of the material modes of Nature. The form beyond the modes of material
Nature is not exactly like the form of this material world, but there is form,
which is called spiritual form. That spiritual form cannot be compared with
any one of these material forms. Anyone, therefore, who does not agree to
accept the spiritual Form of the Supreme Lord, is counted among the atheists.
Lord Buddha did not accept these Vedic principles, and therefore the Vedic
teachers considered Him an atheist. Although Mayavadi philosophers do
pretend to accept the Vedic principles, they indirectly preach the Buddhist
philosophy or atheistic philosophy, without acceptance of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This philosophy is inferior to Buddha’s philosophy,
which directly denies the Vedic authority; for the Mayavadi philosophy is
disguised as Vedanta philosophy, and is thus more dangerous than Buddhism
or atheism.

Vedanta Sutra is purely compiled by Vyasadeva for the benefit of all living
entities in order to understand the philosophy of Bhakti Yoga. Unfortunately,
the Mayavadi commentary, Sarirakabhasya, has practically defeated the purpose
of the Vedanta Sutra. In the Mayavadi commentary, the spiritual, transcendental
Form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead has been denied and the Supreme
Brahman has been dragged down to a level equal with the individual Brahman,
the living entity. Both of them have been denied the spiritual form of individuality, although it is clearly stated that the Supreme Lord is the One Supreme
Living entity, and the living entities are many. Therefore, to consider the
commentary of the Mayavadi philosophy on the Vedanta Sutra is always dangerous. The danger is in the false understanding of the living entity as equal
to the Supreme Lord. A living entity can thus be falsely directed; and asa result
he can never come to his actual position, his eternal activity in Bhakti Yoga.
In other words, the Mayavadi philosophy has rendered the greatest disservice
to humanity by promoting the impersonal view of the Supreme Lord. These
philosophers are depriving human society of the real message of the Vedanta
Sutra.

From the very beginning of the Vedanta Sutra it is accepted that the cosmic
manifestation is a display of the energy of the Supreme Lord. In the very
beginning, Janmadyasya, it is described that the Supreme Brahman is That
from Whom everything is taking appearance. Everything is being maintained
and everything is dissolved in Him. The Absolute Truth is the Cause of Creation, Maintenance, and Dissolution. The cause of the fruit is the tree. When
the tree produces a fruit it does not mean that the tree is impersonal. The tree
produces many hundreds and thousands of fruits but it remains as it is. The
232 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

fruit is produced, developed, stays for some time, dwindles, and then vanishes.
That does not mean that the tree has vanished. From the very beginning,
therefore, the purpose of the Vedanta Sutra is the exposition of the doctrine
of by-products. These activities of production, maintenance and dissolution
are going on by the inconceivable energy of the Supreme Lord. The cosmic
manifestation is a transformation of the energy of the Supreme Lord, although
the energy of the Supreme Lord and the Supreme Lord Himself are nondifferent and inseparable. An example is the touchstone which produces great
quantities of gold by contact with iron—but still the touchstone remains as
it is. The Supreme Lord, therefore, in spite of His producing the huge material
cosmic manifestation, is always in His transcendental Form.

Mayavadi philosophy has the audacity to decline acceptance of the purpose
of Vyasadeva, as explained in the Vedanta Sutra, and has tried instead to establish transformation of the Supreme: a doctrine of transformation by imagination. According to Mayavadi philosophy, the cosmic manifestation is a
transformation of the Absolute Truth, and the Absolute Truth has no separate
existence. This is not the message of the Vedanta Sutra. This transformation has
been explained by Mayavadi philosophers as false; but it is not false—it is
temporary. Mayavadi philosophy says that the Absolute Truth is the only
truth, and this manifestation of the world is false, Actually it is not so. The
material contamination is not false; it is relative truth, and therefore it is temporary.

Pranava or Omkara is the chief indication of Vedic hymns, and Omkara
is considered as the sound Form of the Supreme Lord. From Omkara, all
Vedic hymns have emanated, and the world has also emanated from the
Omkara sound. The world Tatvamasi, picked up from the Vedic hymns, is
not the chief word, but it is an explanation of the constitutional position of
the living entity. The meaning of this Tatvamasi is that the living entity is
a spiritual particle of the Supreme spirit; but this is not the chief motif of the
Vedanta or Vedic literature. The chief sound representation of the Supreme
is Omkara.

All these faulty explanations of Vedanta Sutra are atheism. The Mayavadi
philosophers do not agree to accept the eternal, transcendental Form of the
Supreme Lord and they are therfore unable to be engaged in real devotional
service. The Mayavadi philosopher is ever bereft of Krishna Consciousness
and Krishna’s devotional service. The pure devotee of the Personality of
Godhead never accepts the Mayavadi philosophy as an actual path to transscendental realization. The Mayavadi philosophers are hovering on the moral
Personal and Impersonal Realization 233

and immoral material atmosphere of the cosmic world; they are always engaged
in rejecting and accepting material enjoyment. They have falsely accepted
the nonspiritual as the spiritual. As a result of this misconception they have
forgotten the spiritual, eternal Form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
His Name, Quality and Entourage. They consider the transcendental Pastimes,
Name, Form and Quality of the Supreme as a product of material Nature, and
so the Mayavadi is eternally subjected to the material miseries because of his
acceptance or rejection of material pleasure and misery.

The actual devotees of the Lord are always different from the Mayavadi
philosophers. Impersonalism cannot be a representation of eternity, blissfulness, and knowledge. Being situated in imperfect knowledge of liberation,
the Mayavadi decries eternity, knowledge, and blissfulness, under a misconception of materialism. They reject devotional service. Therefore they are
less intelligent men. They are unable to understand the effect of devotional
service. Their jugglery of words for amalgamating knowledge and the knowable and the knower into one has proved their very existence as a less intelligent class of men. The doctrine of by-product is the real purport of the
beginning of Vedanta Sutra. The Lord is empowered with innumerable
unlimited energies, and as such He displays the by-products of such energies
in different ways. Everything is under His control. The Supreme Controller
is called the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He is manifested in innumerable energies and expansions.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

 

Bhattacharya Is Converted

For the impersonalist and void philosophers the next world is senseless
eternity and bliss. The void philosophers want to establish that ultimately
everything is senseless, and the impersonalists want to establish that the next
world is simply knowledge without any activities. In other words, less intelligent salvationists want to carry imperfect knowledge into the perfect sphere
of spiritual activity. The impersonalist, having experienced a great disadvantage in material activity, wants to establish spiritual life without activity. He
cannot understand the activities of devotional service. Spiritual activity in
devotional service is not intelligeble to the void phiolsophers and impersonalists.
The Vaishnava philosophers know perfectly well that the Absolute Truth,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, having the power of innumerable
potencies, can never be impersonal or void. He can present Himself in multiple
Forms with innumerable energies, and still He remains Himself as the Absolute
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is competent Himself to maintain His

234
Bhattacharya Is Converted 235

transcendental position in spite of His becoming expanded in multiple Forms
and diffused by His innumerable multiple Forms of energy.

Thus Lord Chaitanya showed many defects in the Mayavadi philosophy,
and although Bhattacharya wanted to establish himself with various juggleries
of words and logic, Lord Chaitanya was able to maintain Himself from such
attacks, and He established that the Vedic literature is meant for three things:
to understand our relationship with the Absolute Supreme Personality of
Godhead, to act according to that understanding, and at the end to achieve
the highest perfection of life, love of Godhead. Anybody who wants to prove
something other than the above-mentioned three purposes must be the victim
of his own imagination.

The Lord then quoted some verses from the Puranas, by which He wanted
to establish that Sankaracharya was meant to do his teaching by the Supreme
order of the Personality of Godhead. He quoted a verse from Padma Purana
in which it is stated that the Lord ordered Mahadeva Lord Shiva to present
some imaginary interpretation of the Vedic literature, and thus try to distract
persons from the actual position of the Veda. “By such activity you try to
make them atheists, and after that they can be engaged in producing more
population.” In the same Padma Purana it is also said that Lord Shiva explained
to his wife, Parvati, that in the Age of Kali, in the form of a Brahmin, he
would preach the imperfect explanation of the Veda, known as Mayavadi,
which is actually a second edition of the atheist philosophy of Buddha.

By such explanations of Lord Chaitanya, Bhattacharya was overwhelmed.
And, hearing the explanation of Mayavadi philosophy from Lord Chaitanya,
he could not speak, and simply remained silent for some time. Lord Chaitanya
asked him, “My dear Bhattacharya, don’t be hampered with this explanation.
Please take it from Me that the devotional service of the Supreme Lord is the
highest perfectional stage of human understanding. Devotional service of the
Lord is so attractive that even persons who are already liberated become
devotees of the Lord by the inconceivable potency of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.” There are many instances of this in the Vedic literature, such
as in the Srimad Bhagwatam, First Canto, Seventh Chapter: therein is the famous
Atmarama verse for persons who are attached to self-realization, and liberated
from all material attachment. Such liberated impersonalist sages become
attracted to devotional service by the various activities of Lord Krishna. That
is the transcendental Quality of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Actually, the pure consciousness of the living . entity is to understand
236 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

himself as the eternal servant of the Supreme Lord. Under the spell of illusion,
a less intelligent person accepts the gross body and the subtle body as his self;
such a conception is the basis of the doctrine of transference. Actually the part
and parcel of the Supreme is not subjected eternally to such a false conception
of gross and subtle bodily life. The covering of the living entity by the gross
and subtle body is not his eternal form, but can be changed; or, the living
entity can become free from such existence. While he is in the conception of
the body and mind he has certainly transferred his position from spirit to
matter. Mayavadi philosophers, of course, take advantage of this doctrine
of transference: they say that the living entity under the wrong impression
thinks himself as part and parcel, but he is the Supreme Himself. This doctrine
cannot be tenable.

Bhattacharya then asked Lord Chaitanya to explain the famous Atmarama
verse, as he desired to hear it from the Lord, Lord Chaitanya replied to him
that, first of all, he should explain the verse according to his own understanding, and then Lord Chaitanya would explain it by His own understanding.
Bhattacharya then began to explain the Atmarama Sloka with his method of
logic and grammar. He explained the Atmarama Sloka in nine different ways.
The Lord appreciated his erudite scholarship in explaining the verse, and said:
“My dear Bhattacharya, I know that you are personally a representation of
the learned scholar, like Brihashpati, and you can explain any portion of the
Shastras in such a nice way. And yet your explanation is more or less based
on academic education only. But there is another explanation, beside the academic, scholarly explanation.”

Then, at the request of Bhattacharya, Lord Chaitanya explained the
Atmarama Sloka thus: On the basis of the analytical parts of the verse, the verse
is explained as follows: 1. Atmarama, 2. Cha, 3. Munayah, 4. Nirgranthah, 5. Api,
6. Urukrama, 7. Kurvanti, 8. Ahaituki, 9. Bhaktim, 10. Itthambhutagunah, 11.
Harih. (This verse is already explained in connection with the Lord’s teachings
to Sanatan Goswami). Lord Chaitanya did not touch the nine different explanations of Bhattacharya, but He explained on the basis of 11 analyses of the verse,
and each analytical basis He divided into five and six and, in this way, He expounded a total of 61 different explanations of the Atmarama verse. It is summarized, then, that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is full of innumerable
potencies: nobody can estimate how many transcendental qualities are possessed by Him. They are always inconceivable, and any process of self-relization generally inquires into these inconceivable potencies of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, His energies, and His qualities. But those who are
Bhattacharya Is Converted 237

devotees at once accept this inconceivable position of the Supreme Lord.
He explained that even great liberated souls like the Kumaras and Sukadeva
Goswami also become attracted to the transcendental qualities of the Supreme
Lord.

Bhattacharya then appreciated the explanation of Lord Chaitanya, and
he concluded that Lord Chaitanya is none other than Krishna Himself. And
he began to deprecate his own position. He related that at first he had considered Lord Chaitanya as an ordinary human being, and therefore he felt
that he had been offensive to the identity of Lord Chaitanya. He fell down at
the Lotus Feet of Lord Chaitanya, deprecating his own position, and requested
Lord Chaitanya to show His causeless mercy upon him. Lord Chaitanya
appreciated the humbleness of such a great learned scholar. He therefore
exhibited His own Form, first with four hands, and then the six-handed form
called Sadabhuj. Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya then repeatedly fell down on the
Lotus Feet of the Lord and began to pray with various kinds of prayers composed by himself. He was a great scholar undoubtedly, and after receiving
the causeless mercy of the Lord he was empowered to explain the Lord’s
activities in different ways—such as being able to express the benefit of chanting
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama,
Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

It is said that Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya then composed I00 verses in
appreciation of the Lord’s activities, and those verses are so important that
even Brihashpati, the learned scholar in the heavenly planet, could not compose
such nice verses. The Lord was very much pleased by hearing his composition of 100 verses, and He embraced Bhattacharya. By His touching, Bhattacharya became overwhelmed with ecstasy, and practically became unconscious. He was crying, sometimes trembling, sometimes shivering, sometimes
perspiring, sometimes dancing, sometimes singing, and in this way he fell at
the Lotus Feet of Lord Chaitanya. His brother-in-law, Gopinath Acharya,
and the devotees of the Lord, were surprised to see the condition of Bhattacharya as he was transformed into a great devotee.

Gopinath Acharya addressed the Lord and began to thank Him: “Sir, it
is by Your grace only that Bhattacharya has been transformed from his stonelike position into such a devotee.” Lord Chaitanya replied to Gopinath Acharya
that, due to a devotee’s favor upon others, a stonelike man can be transformed
to a mild flower-like devotee. Actually, Gopinath Acharya, the brother-inlaw of Bhattacharya, had sincerely desired that such a scholar as Bhattacharya
should become a devotee of the Lord. He had sincerely desired that the Lord
238 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

show favor to Bhattacharya, and was glad to see his desire fulfilled by Lord
Chaitanya. In other words, a devotee of the Lord is more merciful than the
Lord Himself. When a devotee desires to show his mercy to a person, the
Lord accepts, and by His grace such a person becomes a devotee.

Lord Chaitanya pacified Bhattacharya and asked him to go home. Bhattacharya again began to praise the Lord and said, “You have descended Yourself to deliver all the fallen souls of this material world. That project is not
so difficult for You, but You have turned a stonehearted man like me, and that
is Your wonderful act. Iam very expert at logical arguments and grammatical
explanations of the Vedic process. I am as hard as a lump of iron. But Your
influence and temperature is so strong that You could melt away even hard
iron like me.”

Lord Chaitanya then returned to His place and Bhattacharya, through
Gopinath Acharya, sent various kinds of Prasadam from Jagannath temple.
The next day, the Lord went to see the temple of Jagannath early in the morning, which is called Mongalarati. The priests in the temple brought Him a garland
from the deity and offered Him various kinds of Prasadam. The Lord was
very much pleased to receive them, and He at once went to the house of
Bhattacharya, taking the Prasadam and the flowers to present to Bhattacharya.
It was early in the morning, and Bhattacharya understood that the Lord had
come and was knocking on his door. He at once rose up from his bed and
began to say Krishna, Krishna!, which was heard by Lord Chaitanya. And at
once he came to the door and opened it and saw the Lord standing there.
He was so pleased to see the Lord early in the morning, and wanted to receive
Him with all care. He again offered Him a nice seat, and both of them sat
there and Lord Chaitanya offered him the Prasadam which He had received
in the temple of Jagannath. Bhattacharya was very glad to receive Prasadam
from the hand of Lord Chaitanya, and without taking his bath and without
performing his daily duties or washing his teeth he began immediately to
eat the Prasadam. Actually, he was now freed from all contamination of
material attachment; and he cited a verse from Padma Purana as he began to
eat the Prasadam.

In the Padma Purana it is stated that when Prasadam is brought or is received,
even if it has become very dry or it is even very old or brought from a distant place, as soon as it is received it must be eaten immediately, without
following any of the rules or duties of one’s daily activities. It is enjoined in
the Shastras that Prasadam should be immediately taken, and there is no
restriction of time and space—that is the order of the Supreme Personality
Bhattacharya Is Converted 239

of Godhead. In other words, there are restrictions in accepting foodstuff
from different kinds of people, but there are no such restrictions in accepting
Prasadam from different kinds of people—neither a restriction as to time,
place, or atmosphere. Prasadam is always transcendental, and it can be taken
under any condition.

Lord Chaitanya was very much pleased to see that Bhattacharya, who
always obeyed rules and regulations, could accept Prasadam without following any such rulesiand regulations. Being so pleased Himself, Lord Chaitanya.
embraced Bhattacharya. Both of Them began to dance in transcendental
ecstasy. In that ecstasy, Lord Chaitanya explained: “My mission in Jagannath
Puri is now fulfilled because I have converted a person like Sarbabhouma
Bhattacharya.”

The Lord continued: “I shall be able now to attain Vaikuntha without
fail.” The missionary activity of a devotee is to convert one person to become
a pure devotee. Then admission to the Spiritual Kingdom is guaranteed.
The Lord was so much pleased with Bhattacharya’s philosophy that He began
to bless him repeatedly: “Dear Bhattacharya, now you are a completely.
pure devotee of Lord Krishna, and Krishna is now very much pleased with
you. From today you are free from the contamination of this material body,
and from today you are free from any entanglement under the spell of material
energy. You are now fit to go back to Godhead, back to Home.” He then
cited one nice verse from the Srimad Bhagwatam, Second Canto, Seventh
Chapter: “Anyone who takes complete shelter of the Lotus Feet of the Supreme
Lord is favored by the Supreme Lord, Who is known as Unlimited. And
such a person gets permission to cross over the ocean of nescience. Anyone
who is under the misconception that this material body is himself, cannot have
appreciation or causeless mercy from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.”

After this incident, Lord Chaitanya returned to His place, and Bhattacharya became a pure devotee without any faults. Since he was formerly
an academic scholar, this conversion of Bhattacharya was possible only by
the causeless mercy of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. From that day forward he
never explained any Vedic literature without an explanation of devotional
service. Gopinath Acharya, his brother-in-law, was very much pleased to
see the condition of Bhattacharya, and he began to dance in ecstasy, vibrating the transcendental sound, Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna,
Hare Hare] Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

The next day, after visting Jagannath temple early in the morning, Bhattacharya came to the place of Lord Chaitanya and offered his respects by
240 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

falling down before the Lord; and he began to explain his past undesirable
behavior. He asked the Lord to say something about devotional service, and
the Lord began to instruct him on the verses of Brihadnaradia Purana, in which
is stated Harer Nama Harer Nama. Lord Chaitanya explained the meaning of
this verse very explicitly. After hearing the explanation of the Harer Nama
from Lord Chaitanya, Bhattacharya became more and more ecstatic. Seeing
his condition, his brother-in-law, Gopinath Acharya, addressed him and said,
“My dear Bhattacharya, what I stated before—‘when he ais favored by the
Supreme Lord he will understand about the techniques of devotional service’
—TI am today seeing fulfilled.”

Bhattacharya offered him his due respect and replied, “My dear Gopinath
Acharya, it is through your mercy that I have the mercy of the Supreme
Lord.” The mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be achieved
through the agency of the pure devotee. Lord Chaitanya’s mercy was bestowed
upon Bhattacharya because of Gopinath Acharya’s endeavor.

Bhattacharya said to his brother-in-law: “You are a great devotee of the
Lord, and I was simply blind with my academic education. So I have achieved
the mercy of the Lord through your agency only.” The Lord was very much
pleased to hear from Bhattacharya that a man can achieve the mercy of the
Lord through the agency of the devotee, and he appreciated the verses and
embraced Bhattacharya, confirming his statement.

The Lord then requested Bhattacharya to go and see Jagannath temple.
Bhattacharya then started out for Jagannath temple, accompanied by Jagadananda and Damodar, two principal associates of Lord Chaitanya. He returned
to his home after seeing Jagannath temple, and brought with him much nice
Prasadam purchased from the temple. He sent all this Prasadam to Lord
Chaitanya through his Brahmin servant, and also dispatched two verses written
by him on palm tree leaves, and requested Jagadananda to do this favor and
deliver them. All of them again came back to Lord Chaitanya and offered
Him the Prasadam and the verses on the palm leaf. But before reaching the
Lord, Mukunda Datta, who also undertook the delivery of the written palm
leaf, had noted the verses down in his book. Lord Chaitanya read those verses
and tore them into pieces, because He never liked to be praised by anyone.
But his devotees had the verses written by Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya, from
the notes of Mukunda Datta.

The purport of the verses written by Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya was
praise of the Lord, the Supreme Original Personality of Godhead. He—Lord
Chaitanya—has descended to preach detachment and transcendental knowleBhattacharya Is Converted 241

dge along with devotional service to the people in general. Lord Chaitanya
is the Original Personality of Godhead, and is compared with the ocean of
mercy. “Let me surrender unto that Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.” The
other verse states, “The Lord, seeing that devotional service was absent,
descended Himself in the Form of Lord Chaitanya to preach that devotional
service. Let us all surrender unto His Lotus Feet to learn from Him what is
actual devotional service.” These two important verses are taken by the
devotees of the Lord in disciplic succession, as the most important jewels, and
Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya has become highest amongst the devotees because
of these famous verses.

Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya was thus converted to become one of the
important devotees of the Lord, and he had no other interest than to serve the
Lord. His only concern was to think of Lord Chaitanya constantly, and
this meditation and chanting became the main purpose of his life. One day
Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya came before the Lord, and after offering his
respects he began to read a verse from the Srimad Bhagwatam. This verse is
stated in the Tenth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, in connection with Lord
Brahma’s prayer to the Lord. Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya wanted to change
two letters in the last portion of the verse, where the word Muktipade occurs.
Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya wanted to change it into Bhakti. The purport
of the verse is: A person who devotes his mind, body and speech to the service
of the Lord, even in the midst of miserable life due to past misdeeds, is assured
of liberation. And Bhattacharya wanted to change the Mukti, to Bhakti—
devotional service.

The Lord inquired from Bhattacharya, “Why have you changed the
original verse? The word is Mukti, and why have you changed it into Bhakti?”
Bhattacharya replied that Mukti is not so valuable as Bhakti; and therefore
Mukti is a sort of punishment for the pure devotee. He had therefore changed
the word from Mukti to Bhakti. He began to explain his realization of Bhakti,
and said, “Any person who does not accept the transcendental Personality
of Godhead and His transcendental Form cannot know the Absolute Truth.

Anyone who does not understand the transcendental nature of the Body of
Krishna becomes His enemy and decries or fights with Him. And for such
enemies of the Lord, the destination is to merge into the Brahman effulgence
of the Lord. Such kind of Mukti or liberation is never befitting the devotees
of the Lord. Although there are five kinds of liberation, as, (1) getting admission to the same planet in which the Lord resides, (2) being able to associate
with the Lord, (3) having a transcendental body like the Lord, (4) having
242 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

opulence like the Lord, and (5) merging into the existence of the Lord, a
devotee is satisfied being engaged in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord, without any particular interest for any one of the above mentioned
kinds of state of liberation. Specifically, a devotee is most averse to merging
into the existence of the Lord, and becoming without any individual identity.
A devotee considers oneness with the Lord as worse than hell, even though he
may accept one of the other four kinds of liberation in consideration of being
engaged in the service of the Lord. Of the two possibilities for merging in the
Transcendence, namely, (1) becoming one with the Impersonal Brahman
effulgence, and (2) becoming one with the Personality of Godhead, the latter
is still more abominable to a devotee. The devotee has no other aspiration than
to be always engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. On
hearing this, Lord Chaitanya informed Bhattacharya that there is another
purport of the word Mukti. Muktipada means directly the Personality of
Godhead. That is to say, the Personality of Godhead has innumerable liberated
souls engaged in His transcendental loving service, or He is the ultimate Resort
for the ninth subject, called liberation. So, in either of the above mentioned
im port, Krishna becomes the ultimate Shelter. Sarvabhouma replied, “Inspite of such import, I prefer Bhakti to Mukti. Although according to You,
there are two kinds of imports of the word Mukti, still, because this sound is
equivocal, I shall prefer directly Bhakti to Mukti because by direct perception,
Mukti refers to the context of becoming one with the Supreme. I therefore
hate to utter the word Mukti, and I feel enthusiastic in uttering the word
Bhakti.” At this, Lord Chaitanya laughed very loudly, and embraced the
Bhattacharya with great love.

Thus the same Bhattacharya who took pleasure in explaining Mayavadi
philosophy became a staunch devotee, so much so that he hated to utter the
word Mukti. This is only possible by the causeless mercy of Lord Sri Chaitanya, and by His Grace He can turn iron into gold, like a touchstone. After
this incident, all persons marked a great change in the Bhattacharya and they
concluded that this was possible only by the inconceivable power of Lord
Chaitanya. And they took it for granted that Lord Chaitanya was none other
than Lord Krishna Himself.
yur
—
14

=! |i7

i SS

 

Ramananda Roy Talking on High Level Krishna Consciousness with Lord Chaitanya
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

 

Lord Chaitanya and
Ramananda Roy

The author of Chaitanya Charitamrita has described Lord Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu as the ocean of transcendental knowledge, and Sri Ramananda
Roy as the cloud which is produced from the ocean. Ramananda Roy was
a greatly advanced scholar in devotional service, and by the grace of Lord
Chaitanya he gathered all such transcendental conclusions, just as the cloud
achieves its existence from the water of the ocean. As the cloud appears
from the ocean and redistributes water all over the world, and then again
goes back to the ocean, so by the grace of Lord Chaitanya Ramananda Roy
achieved his higher knowledge in devotional service, and thus he again went
to Lord Chaitanya at Puri after retirement from service.

When Lord Chaitanya was visiting the southern part of India, He first
of all visited the great temple Bisakhapattan, the temple known as Jiayar
Nrishingha Kshetra. It is situated at a place known as Singachalam, five miles
from the railway station Bisakhapattan. The temple is situated on the top
of a hill, and there are many temples in that quarter, but Jiayar Nrishingha

243
244 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Kshetra temple is the biggest of them all. The temple is full of beautiful sculpture, still wonderful for many students; and, on account of its popularity,
it is a very rich temple. There is an inscription in the temple which states that
the king of Vijynagar formerly decorated this temple with gold, and smeared
the body of the deity with gold. For facilitating attendance at the temple
there are free apartments for the visitors. The temple is managed by priests
who belong to the sect of Ramanujacharya.

When Lord Chaitanya visited this temple He praised the deity, and He
quoted a verse from Srimad Bhagwatam: “Although Lord Nrishingha is very
servere to the demons and the non-devotees, He is very kind to His submissive
devotees like Prahlad.” Lord Nrishingha appeared as an incarnation of
Krishna when Prahlad, a boy devotee of the Lord, was too much harassed
by his father, Hiranya Kasipu. As the lion is very ferocious to other animals,
but is very kind and submissive to his cubs, so Lord Nrishingha, although
He appeared ferocious to Hiranya Kasipu, was very kind to Prahlad, His
devotee.

After visiting the temple of Jiayar Nrishingha, the Lord proceeded farther
south into India, and ultimately He reached the bank of the Gudabudee. On
the bank of the Gudabudee the Lord remembered the Yamuna of Vrindaban,
and the nice trees on the bank were considered by Him the forest of Vrindaban;
so He was in ecstasy there. After taking His bath on the bank of the Gudabudee,
the Lord was sitting a little off from the bank and was chanting Hare Krishna,
Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare. Sitting in that way, the Lord saw that the governor of the province,
Sri Ramananda Roy, had reached the bank of the river accompanied by his
associates, many Brahmins, and a band party. The Lord had asked about
Ramananda Roy, the governor of this province, from Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya, and the Lord was requested by Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya to see
the great devotee Ramananda Roy at Kabur.

The Lord could understand that this man approaching was Ramananda
Roy, and He wanted to see him immediately. But, because He was in the
renounced order of life, He restrained Himself from seeing a person of political
affairs. But Ramananda Roy, as a great devotee, was attracted by the Features
of Lord Chaitanya as a Sannyasi, and he himself came to see Him. Ramananda
Roy, on reaching Chaitanya, prostrated himself to offer Him obeisances and
respect. Lord Chaitanya received him by vibrating Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna,
Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
When Ramananda Roy presented his credentials, Lord Chaitanya embraced
Lord Chaitanya and Ramananda Roy 245

him, and both of them became overwhelmed with ecstasy. The Brahmins who
accompanied Ramananda Roy were surprised that these two persons were
overwhelmed with transcendental ecstasy simply by embracing. The Brahmins
were all stalwarts of the rituals, and they could not understand the meaning
of these devotional symptoms. They were rather surprised to see that a great
Sannyasi could touch a Sudra, and they were also surprised that Ramananda
Roy, who was a great governor, and practically king of that province, was
crying simply by touching a Sannyasi. While the Brahmins were considering
this, Lord Chaitanya understood the unfavorable situation, and He pacified
Himself.

After this, Lord Chaitanya and Ramananda Roy both sat down together,
and Lord Chaitanya informed him that, “Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya has
spoken very highly of you, so I have come to see you.”

Ramananda Roy replied, “Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya considers myself as
one of his devotees, and therefore he very kindly recommended You to see me.”
Ramananda Roy very much appreciated the Lord’s behavior for His touching
a man of wealth. A king or governor or any politician is always absorbed
in thoughts of political affairs and pounds-shilling-pence; therefore, such
persons are avoided by a Sannyasi. But Lord Chaitanya knew Ramananda
Roy to be a great devotee, and so He did not hesitate to touch and embrace
him. Ramananda Roy was surprised by the behavior of Lord Chaitanya, and
he cited a nice verse from Srimad Bhagwatam, in which it is stated that, “The
great personalities and sages appear in the houses of worldly men just to show
them mercy.”

Lord Chaitanya’s special treatment of Ramananda Roy indicated that,
although Ramananda Roy was born of a family who were not Brahmins,
still he was far, far advanced in spiritual knowledge and activity. Therefore
he was more respectable than a Brahmin who happens to born in a Brahmin
family. Although Sri Ramananda, out of his meek and gentle behavior,
accepted himself as born of a lower Sudra family, still Lord Chaitanya considered him to be situated in the highest transcendental stage of great devotion. The devotees never advertize themselves as being great, but the Lord
is very anxious to advertize the glory of the devotee. Ramananda Roy and
Lord Chaitanya, just acquainted for the first time that morning at the bank
of the Gudabudee, separated, and there was an engagement made that
Ramananda Roy would come in the evening to see the Lord.

In the evening, when the Lord was seated after taking His bath, Ramananda
Roy came to see Him with a servant. He offered his respects and sat down
246 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

before the Lord. Before Ramananda Roy could ask the Lord anything about
advancement of spiritual knowledge, the Lord Himself inquired, “Please
quote some verses from Scripture about the ultimate goal of life for the human
being.”

Sri Ramananda Roy at once replied to the Lord that, “A person who is
sincere in his occupational duty will gradually develop the sense of God consciousness.” In this connection he quoted a verse from the Vishnu Purana,
in which it is stated that the Supreme Lord is worshipped by following the
principles of one’s occupational duty, and there is no other alternative for
satisfying the Supreme Lord from the formalities of performing one’s occupational duties. The purport is that human life is meant for understanding one’s
relationship with the Supreme Lord and acting in that way. Any human being
can dovetail himself with the service of the Lord by discharging his prescribed
duties or occupational performances.

For this purpose, human society may be divided into four classes: namely,
the intelligent class, or the Brahmins, the administrative class, or the Kshatriyas,
the merchantile, or productive class, called Vaishyas, and the laborer class
or the helping class, the Sudras. For each division of human society there are
prescribed rules and regulations and occupational functions. The prescribed
duties of the four classes or four divisions of human society are very nicely
described in the Bhagavad Gita, Eighteenth Chapter, 42-44 verses. An organized, civilized society of humanity should follow such prescribed rules and
regulations for particular divisions. At the same time, for spiritual advancement, they must follow the four stages of Ashrama: namely, the student life,
which is called Brahmachary life; then householder’s life, then retired life, and
then renounced life.

Ramananda Roy stated that persons who are strictly following the rules
and regulations of these eight divisions of human society are the best, and they
are actually satisfying the Supreme Lord. One who does not follow the principles of the social division and the rules of spiritual advancement is certainly
spoiling his human form of life and gliding down towards hell. One can
peacefully execute the goal of his human life simply by following the rules
and regulations which apply to himself. The character of a particular person
becomes developed by following the principles of regulation according to
his birth and association and education. The divisions of society are so designed
that many persons of different characteristics can be regulated under them,
for the peaceful administration of social life and spiritual advancement. The
social divisions of human society may be divided as follows: 1. One who has
Lord Chaitanya and Ramananda Roy 247

taken as the aim of his life to understand the Supreme Lord, the Personality
of Godhead, and for which aim he has devoted himself to the learning of the
Vedas and similar literatures, is called a Brahmin. 2. A person who has taken
to the occupation of showing his force and of administering the government
is called a Kshatriya. 3. One who is engaged in agriculture and herding cows
and trade and business is called a Vaishya. 4. Persons who have no special
knowledge but are satisfied by serving the three other higher social divisions
are called Sudras. If one faithfully discharges his prescribed duties, it is surely
an advancement toward perfection. Therefore, regulated life is the source
of perfection for everyone. This regulated life, when culminating in devotional service to the Lord, attains its perfection. Otherwise it is a useless waste
of time.

Therefore, Lord Chaitanya, after hearing from Ramananda Roy about
the proper execution of regulated life, said that this is external. Indirectly,
He asked Ramananda to state something which is better than this external
exhibition of life. Formal execution of this ritualistic life or religious life is
not very congenial unless it attains the perfection of devotional service.
Actually. Lord Vishnu is not satisfied simply by the ritualistic performance
of Vedic instructions, but He is actually pleased when one attains the stage of
devotional service.

The verse cited by Ramananda Roy in reply to Lord Chaitanya means
that, by the divisional ritualistic performances, one can rise up to the point
of devotional service. In the Bhagavad Gita we find that Lord Sri Krishna,
Who appeared Himself for the deliverance of all classes of people, has mentioned that the human being can attain the highest perfectional stage of life
by worshipping the Supreme Lord, from Whom everything has emanated,
by dint of his occupational duties. It is stated in the Bhagavad Gita: “A person
duly engaged in his occupational duties attains the highest perfection.” This
perfectional process is followed by great devotees like Bodhyana, Tanaka,
Dramida, Guhadeva, Kapardi, Bharuchi—all these great personalities have
followed this particular path of perfection of the human life. The Vedic injunctions also aim at this point of life. Ramananda Roy wanted to present this
fact before the Lord. But, apparently, simply discharging the ritualistic duties
is not perfection. Therefore Lord Chaitanya said that it is external. Lord
Chaitanya’s purport was that a man having a material conception of life, even
if he follows the ritualistic regulations, cannot attain the highest perfection.
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

 

Relationship with
the Supreme Lord

The reason Lord Chaitanya rejected the statement of the Vishnu Purana
made by Ramananda Roy is that He thus rejected a class of philosophers who
are called Karmamimsat. Karmamimsat philosophers accept God as being subject
to one’s work. If one works nicely, God is bound to give them good results:
that is their conclusion. Therefore, from the statement of the Vishnu Purana
as enunciated by Ramananda Roy, the meaning is sometimes drawn that
Vishnu, the Supreme Lord, has no independence. He is bound to award a
certain kind of result to the worker. Such a non-independent Supreme Personality of Godhead becomes subjected to the worshipper, and the worshipper
accepts the Supreme Lord as he wishes, both impersonal and Personal, although
they give more or less stress to the impersonal Feature of the Supreme Absolute
Truth.

Lord Chaitanya did not like this idea of impersonalism, and therefore
He rejected it. He said: “Tell Me if you know of something beyond this
conception of the Supreme Absolute Truth.”

248
Relationship with the Supreme Lord 249

Therefore Ramananda Roy stated that it is better to give up the result
of fruitive activities. Ramananda Roy understood the purpose of Lord Chaitanya. He quoted a verse from Srimad Bhagavad Gita, Ninth Chapter, 37th
verse. The Lord says there that, whatever one does, whatever one eats, whatever
one sacrifices, whatever one gives or whatever austerity one undergoes for
a certain achievement—everything should be dedicated to the service of the
Supreme Lord. Srimad Bhagwatam also, Eleventh Canto, Second Chapter,
36th verse, has a similar passage, in which it is stated that one should submit
everything, the result of his fruitive activities, either by his body, by his
speeches, by his mind, by his senses, by his intelligence, by his soul, or by his
practical natural modes of Nature—everything should be surrendered to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayan.

Lord Chaitanya rejected this second statement of Ramananda Roy,
and He said, “If you know something higher, state it.” The instructions of the
Bhagavad Gita and the Srimad Bhagwatam, to offer everything to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is a better proposal than the impersonal idea of the
Supreme Lord, and making the Supreme Lord subject to our work. But it is
still short of surrendering activities to the Supreme Lord. The worker’s
identification with material existence is not changed without proper guidance.
Such activity of the fruitive worker will continue his material existence. He
is simply instructed here to offer the fruitive result of his work to the Supreme
Lord, but he has no idea of how to get out of the material entanglement.
Therefore Lord Chaitanya rejected this proposal.

After this second rejection by Lord Chaitanya, Ramananda proposed that
one should forsake his occupational activities, and by such detachment rise
to the transcendental plane. This is, in other words, renunciation of one’s
worldly life. In this connection Ramananda Roy gave two evidences from the
Shastras: in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Eleventh Canto, Eleventh Chapter, the
Lord says, “In the religious Scriptures I have described ritualistic principles,
and how one becomes situated in devotional service. That is the highest
perfectional stage of religiousness.” Similarly, in the Bhagavad Gita, Eighteenth
Chapter, 67th verse, the Lord says: “You give up all kinds of religiousness
and just surrender unto Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I shall
protect you from all sinful reactions, and you have nothing to be aggrieved
over.”

On hearing this from Ramananda Roy, Lord Chaitanya rejected it again.
By rejecting Ramananda Roy’s third proposal, Lord Chaitanya wanted to
demonstrate that simple renunciation is not sufficient. There must be positive
250 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

engagement. Without positive engagement the highest perfectional stage
cannot be attained. Generally, in the renounced order of life, there are two
kinds of philosophers: the goal of one is Nirvana, and of the other, the impersonal quality of the Brahman effulgence. They cannot conceive that they can
reach beyond, or that there is a Spiritual Sky with Vaikuntha Planets. Because
such mentalities cannot have any conception of the Spiritual Planets and
activities, therefore Lord Chaitanya rejected the proposal of renunciation.

Ramananda Roy then gave evidence from Bhagavad Gita, Eighteenth
Chapter, 54th verse, wherein the Lord says as follows: “When a person realizes
himself as not different from the Supreme Absolute Truth by cultivation of
knowledge, he becomes joyful and freed from all kinds of lamentation and
material desires. At that time he perfects his Brahman realization by looking
at everyone on the same spiritual level. This stage of Brahman realization can
elevate one to the transcendental stage of devotional service.” The purport
is that Ramananda Roy first suggested devotional service with renunciation
of fruitive results from one’s work; but better than that stage of life is devotional service with full knowledge and spiritual realization.

Lord Chaitanya again rejected this proposal because in that stage of simply
renouncing material results in Brahman realization there is no realization of
the Spiritual World and the spiritual activities. Although in the Brahman
realization stage there is no material contamination, yet, because there is no
positive engagement in spiritual activity, it is not perfectly cleansed. It is
still on the mental plane, and therefore external. The pure living entity is not
liberated unless he has the complete spiritual idea and is engaged in spiritual
activity. When one is absorbed in impersonal thought, or void thought, then his
entrance into eternal life, blissful life, and life of knowledge is not complete.
When spiritual knowledge is not complete, people will hinder you in your
attempt to vacate the mind of all material variegatedness. Impersonalists
are hindered in such attempts to make the mind void by artificial meditation.
It is very difficult to make the mind void of material conceptions. In the Bhagavad
Gita it is stated that those who indulge in such voidness or impersonal meditation make very difficult spiritual advancement, and what they attain is
not complete liberation. Therefore Lord Chaitanya rejected it.

After rejection of this fifth proposal, Ramananda Roy said that devotional
service without any attempt at cultivation of knowledge or mental speculation is the highest stage of perfection. In this connection he gave evidence
from Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, in which Lord
Brahma says to the Supreme Personality of Godhead: “My dear Lord, one
Relationship with the Supreme Lord 251

should give up monistic speculation and the cultivation of knowledge
altogether. He should begin his spiritual life in devotional service by receiving
the information of the activities of the Lord from a realized devotee of the
Lord. If one prosecutes his spiritual cultivation by following these two principles and keeping himself rightly in the honest path of living, then, although
Your Lordship is never conquerable You become conquered by him by such
a process.”

When this prescription was presented by Ramananda Roy to Lord Chaitanya, the Lord at once said, “Yes, this is right.” In other words, the mission
of Lord Chaitanya is as follows: In this age there is no possibility of acquiring
spiritual knowledge by renunciation, or by mixed devotional service, or by
fruitive results in mixed devotional service, or by the culture of knowledge.
Because the people are not so advanced, and in fact most of them are fallen,
and because there is no time to elevate them in a general process, the best
thing, Lord Chaitanya prescribed, is to let them remain in whatever condition
they are—but let them be engaged in hearing about the activities of the Lord,
as they are explained in the Bhagavad Gita and Srimad Bhagwatam. Such messages should be received by aural reception from realized souls. By this principle
a person may live in whatever condition he is in, and still make progress in
spiritual advancement. He will advance surely and certainly, so much so that
he will be a fully realized soul of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Lord Chaitanya accepted these principles, but He requested Ramananda
Roy to go further in advanced devotional service. Lord Chaitanya gave
Ramananda Roy a chance to develop gradually the advancement from the
principles of Varnashram Dharma (caste and the four orders of spiritual life);
and, further, offering the results of all fruitive activities. Then he recommended
discussion of spiritual knowledge. Lord Chaitanya rejected all of these, because
in the field of executing pure devotional service there is very little use for
such principles. Artificial methods of devotional service without self realization cannot be accepted as pure devotional service. Self-realized pure devotional
service is completely different from all other kinds of transcendental activities.
The highest stage of transcendental activities is always free from all material
desires and fruitive activities, and speculative attempts at knowledge. The
highest stage concentrates on a simple, favorable execution of pure devotional service.

Ramananda Roy could understand the motive of Lord Chaitanya, and
therefore he stated that attainment of pure love of Godhead is the highest
perfectional stage. There is a very nice verse in Padya Vali which is understood
252 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

to be composed by Ramananda Roy himself. The purport of the verse is:
“So long as there is hunger within the belly and one has a feeling for eating
and drinking—so long, by taking anything eatable, one becomes happy.
Similarly, there may be much paraphernalia for worshipping the Supreme
Lord, but when that is mixed with pure love of Godhead, it becomes an actual
source of transcendental happiness.“ There is another verse in that connection
composed by Ramananda Roy, in which it is stated that even after millions and
millions of births one cannot achieve a sense of devotional service. But if,
somehow or other, one becomes desirous of achieving the stage of devotional
service, the association of a pure devotee will help such a strong desire for
serving the Lord to become prominent. One should try to have such a strong
desire to become engaged in devotional service, if it is available from any
source. In these two verses, Ramananda Roy has described first the regulative
principles, and, second, the developed love of Godhead. Lord Chaitanya
wanted to bring him up to this stage of developed love of Godhead, and to
speak from that basis. Therefore, the discussion between Ramananda Roy
and Lord Chaitanya will now proceed on the basis of love of Godhead:

If love of Godhead becomes elevated to personal affinity, that is called
Prema Bhakti. In the beginning of Prema Bhakti there is no establishment of
a particular relationship between the Supreme Lord and the devotee, but when
this stage of Prema Bhakti develops further, there is manifested, in different
transcendental flavors, a relationship with the Supreme Lord. The first stage
is called servitude—to accept the Supreme Lord as the Master, and the devotee
as the eternal servitor. When Lord Chaitanya accepted this process, Ramananda
Roy described the relationship of the servitor and the Master. As cited in the
Srimad Bhagwatam, Ninth Canto, Fifth Chapter, Durbasamuni was a great
mystic Yogi and considered himself to be very elevated. Yet he envied Maharaj
Amburish, who was known as the greatest devotee of the time. Durbasamani
wanted to harass Maharaj Amburish, and as a result he met with great catastrophe, and Durbasamani was defeated by the Sudarsan Chakra of the Lord.
The Yogi admitted his fault and said, “For pure devotees who are always
engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, nothing is considered
impossible to obtain, because they're engaged in the service of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, hearing Whose very Name is sufficient for liberation.”

Yamunacharya has composed various verses in his book, Strotraratna. In this
Strotraratna, Yamunacharya writes a nice verse, the purport of which is as fol
lows: “My Lord, persons who are keeping themselves independent of Your
service are helpless. They’re working on their own account, and they have no
Relationship with the Supreme Lord 253

support from superior authority. Therefore I long for the time when I shall
be fully engaged in Your transcendental loving service, without any desire for
material satisfaction or hovering over the mental plane. When I shall be engaged in such unalloyed devotional service I shall enjoy actual spiritual life.”

On hearing that statement of Ramananda Roy, the Lord requested him
to go still further.
CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE

 

The Transcendental Pastimes of

Radha and Krishna

When Lord Chaitanya said that that was accepted, and that he might
advance further, Ramananda Roy said that fraternal relationship with Lord
Krishna is a still higher transcendental position. Ramananda Roy’s purport
in saying this is that, when the relationship with Krishna is increased by a
more affectionate tendency, then the mood of fearfulness, the consciousness
of the extra-superiority of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, becomes
diminished; and there is the development of a mood of faithfulness. And this
faithfulness is called friendship. In this friendly relationship, there is a sense
of equality between Lord Krishna and His friends.

In this connection, Ramananda Roy quoted a nice verse from Srimad
Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, 12th Chapter, where Sukdeva Goswami describes
Lord Krishna’s lunch with His friends in the forest where they went to play
with the cows. It is said there that the cowherds boys who went to play in the
forest with Krishna enjoyed transcendental friendship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Who is considered the Impersonal Brahman by great

254
The Transcendental Pastimes of Radha and Krishna 255

sages, considered the Supreme Personality of Godhead by the devotees; and,
for the ordinary man, He is considered an ordinary human being.

Lord Chaitanya appreciated this statement by Ramananda Roy very
much, but still He said, “You can advance further.” At the request of Lord
Chaitanya, Ramanada Roy stated that the relationship with Krishna as son
and father, the relationship of parenthood, is a still higher transcendental
position.

Ramananda Roy’s meaning was that the friendly attitude toward Krishna,
increased by still more affection becomes the relationship between parents
and their children. In this connection Ramananda Roy quoted a nice verse
from Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth canto, 8th chapter, where it is stated that the
King inquired from Sukdeva Goswami as to the magnitude of righteous activities which had been performed by Yasoda, the mother of Krishna, for which
the Supreme Personality of Godhead called her “mother,” and sucked at her
breast. And he quoted still another verse from Srimad Bhagwatam (Tenth
Canto, 9th Chapter), in which it is stated that Yasoda, the wife of Nanda,
a cowherd man, received mercy from the Supreme Personality of Godhead
which is incomparable, even by the mercy which is received by Brahma,
the first created living being, or Lord Shiva, or even the Goddess of Fortune,
Lakshmi, who is always situated on the chest of Lord Vishnu.

Lord Chaitanya asked Ramananda Roy to proceed further, to come to
the point of conjugal love. Ramananda Roy, understanding the mind of
Lord Chaitanya, immediately answered that the relationship of conjugal
love with Krishna is the highest position. In other words, intimate relationship with Krishna develops from an ordinary conception of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, to the conception of Master and servant. And when it
has become confidential, it develops into a friendly relationship, and when
it is further developed, it is the relationship between parents and the children;
and when it is developed to the highest point of complete love and affection,
it is known as conjugal love with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

In this connection, Ramananda Roy quoted a nice stanza from the Srimad
Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, 47th Chapter, in which it is stated that the transcendental mode of ecstasy which was exhibited during the Rasa Dance of the
Gopis with Krishna was never relishable even by the Goddess of Fortune,
who is always situated on the chest of the Lord in the spiritual kingdom.
What to speak of the experience of ordinary women?

Ramananda Roy then explained the gradual process of the development
of pure love with Krishna. He stated that a person who is related to the Supreme
256 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Personality of Godhead in any one of the different modes of affection is in
the relationship just suitable for him. But actually a relationship with the
Supreme Lord begins with the relationship of Master and servant, and further
develops into friendship, and further develops into paternal love, and further
develops into conjugal love. Anyone who is situated in his particular relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead is in the best relationship
for him, but when we study all these different flavors of transcendental taste
in relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we can see that
the first stage is Brahmabuta, or the neutral stage of realization of the Supreme
Lord. The state accompanying the conception of accepting the Lord as Master
and oneself as His servant is better; and the more developed conception of that
relationship is as a friend; and still further as a father; this is the superior
quality of development. From friendship to paternal love, the relationship
is advanced and of superior quality, and the further advance to conjugal love
is the supreme relationship with the Supreme Lord.

Self realization with the sense of servitude is certainly a transcendental
development. And the mode of Master and servant, with fraternity added,
is a further development. And with progressive affection, it develops into
parenthood. But the highest development is conjugal love in relationship
with the Supreme Lord. In this connection, Ramananda Roy quoted a verse
from Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu. It is stated there that the development of spiritual
affection for the Supreme Lord is in all categories transcendental, but that
the specific aptitude of a devotee to a particular state is more relishable by
him than others.

Such a transcendental relationship with the Supreme Lord cannot, however,
be manufactured by the mental concoction of a pseudo devotee. In this con‘nection, Rupa Goswami in his Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu, has stated that devotional service without reference to the Vedic Scriptures as well as to Vedic
literature, following the principles of Vedic Scripture, can never be approved.
Sri Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati Goswami Maharaj remarks that those who
are professional spiritual masters, professional Bhagwatam reciters, professional
performers of Kirtan, or persons who are engaged in so-called devotional
service of their own mental concoction, cannot be accepted. There are different
kinds of professional communities known as Aul, Vaul, Kartabhaza, Nada
Darbesa, Snai, Atibibadi, Chudadhari, Gaurnaganagari. A member of the Ventor
Goswami society, or the caste called Goswami, cannot be accepted as the descendent of the six original Goswamis. Similarly, so-called devotees who manufacture different kinds of songs in connection with Lord Chaitanya, or those
The Transcendental Pastimes of Radha and Krishna 257

who are professional priests or paid recitors, cannot be accepted in this connection. One who does not follow the principle of Pancharatra, and one who is
an impersonalist, and one who is addicted to sex life, cannot be compared
with persons who have dedicated their lives to the service of Krishna.

A pure devotee who is always engaged in Krishna Consciousness can
sacrifice everything for the service of the Lord. A person who has dedicated
his life to the service of Lord Chaitanya and Krishna and the Spiritual Master,
or a person who is following the principles of householder life, and similarly
those who are following the principles of the renounced life in the order of
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, are devotees and cannot be compared to the professional men.

When one is freed from all material contamination, any one of the relationships with Krishna is relishable transcendentally. Unfortunately, those who
are inexperienced in the transcendental science cannot appreciate these different
stages of relationship with the Supreme Lord, and they think that all such
different stages of relationship with the Supreme Lord, and all these explanations, are due to Maya. But in Chaitanya Charitamrita, the author has given
a very nice practical example of this matter. He states that earth, water, fire,
air, and ether are the five elements, and these five elements develop from the
subtle form to the grosser form. For example, in the ether there is a characteristic
which is called sound. But in the air, there is the characteristic of ether, sound,
plus a sensation of touch. When one comes to the fire, there is the characteristic
of ether plus the characteristic of air, plus the characteristic which is called
form. So, in fire there are three characteristics; similarly, when we come to
water, there are four characteristics—namely sound, touch, form and taste.
When you go to earth, there are five characteristics, namely sound, touch,
form, taste, and smell. As there is a development of different characteristics,
beginning from ether down to earth, so, if we analyze the different relationships with Lord Krishna and the devotee, we find that all the five characteristics
of the devotional attitude are present in the relationship of conjugal love.
Therefore, the relationship with Krishna in conjugal love can only be accepted
as the highest perfectional stage of love of God.

There is a nice verse from the Tenth Canto, 82nd Chapter of Srimad
Bhagwatam, which can be cited here: “Devotional service for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the life of every living entity.” And the Lord, addressing the damsels of Vraja, informed them that their love for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the only cause of their achieving the association of
the Lord. It is said that Lord Krishna, in relationship with His devotees, accepts
258 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya _

all kinds of devotional service according to the aptitude of each particular
devotee, and Krishna also responds to such a devotee in a reciprocal way.
For anyone who wants the relationship with Krishna of Master and servant,
He plays the part of the perfect Master. For anyone who wants Krishna as
his Son, in the parental relationship, Krishna plays the part of the perfect Son.
Similarly, if a devotee wants to worship Krishna in conjugal love, Krishna
plays the part of husband or paramour in perfection. But He has admitted that
His loving relationship with the damsels of Vraja in conjugal love is the highest
perfectional stage.

In Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, 32nd Chapter, Krishna addressed the
Gopis and said, “My dear Gopis, your relationship with Me is completely
transcendental, and in exchange for your love, it is not possible for Me to offer
anything, even after many births. You have been able to give up all attachment
for material enjoyment, and you have searched after Me. Iam unable to repay
your love; and therefore, be pleased with your own activities.”

Srila Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati Goswami Maharaj has remarked that
there is a class of common men who say as follows: Anyone and everyone
can worship the Supreme Lord according to his particular invention of some
mode of worship, and he will still achieve the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One may try to approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, either
by fruitive activities or by speculative knowledge or by meditation or by
austerity—any one of the methods accepted will help one to reach the perfectional stage. They generally give the example that if anyone wants to reach
a certain destination he can accept one of many different paths, and still reach
the same place. Similarly, they say the Supreme Absolute Truth may be worshipped either as the Goddess Kali, or the Goddess Durga, or Lord Shiva,
or Ganesha, or Rama, or Hari, or Brahma—any way that the Absolute Truth
is addressed, it is all one and the same. They give an example in this connection
that a man might have different names, but if he is called by any of those names
he will answer.

Such explanations by mental concoction might be very pleasing to the
ordinary person, but they are full of misconceptions of transcendental life.
One who worships different demigods conducted by material lust cannot
achieve the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The external energy of the
Supreme Lord can award them some result for worshipping the particular
demigods, as is stated in the Bhagavad Gita: “One who does not worship the
Supreme Personality of Godhead directly cannot achieve His association by
worshipping the demigods.” The Supreme Personality of Godhead awards
The Transcendental Pastimes of Radha and Krishna 259

the benediction of His association only to persons who worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and not via the demigods. It is not a fact, therefore,
that everyone and anyone can reach the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
worshipping material demigods. It is surprising, therefore, how a man can
imagine he will become perfect by worshipping the demigods. The result
of devotional service in full Krishna Consciousness cannot be compared with
the result of worshipping different demigods or by functioning in fruitive
activities or by mental speculation. The results of fruitive activities are that,
either one can go to the heavenly planets, or one can go to hell.
CHAPTER THIRTY

 

Pure Love For Krishna

The difference between executing ordinary religious procedures and devotional service is very great. By executing religious rituals one can achieve the
stage of the perfection of material gain, economic development, sense gratification, or liberation—being merged into the existence of the Supreme. But
the result of transcendental devotional service is completely different from
such temporary benefits of the material condition. Devotional service of the
Lord is evergreen, and it is increasingly transcendentally pleasing. Therefore,
there is a gulf of difference between the result of devotional service and the
result of the four goals of the religious rituals. The great spiritual energy
known as Jagatdhatri, or the Superintendent of the material world, or Mahamaya,
and the material executive departmental directors, the demigods, and all of
the products of the external energy of the Supreme Lord, are perverted reflections of the opulence of the Supreme Lord. They are, practically, order carriers
of the Supreme Lord in the material creation and its management. In the
Brahma Samhita it is stated that the working of the supremely powerful super
260
Pure Love for Krishna 261

intendent, Durga, is just like a shadow indication of the Supreme Lord. The
sun works just like the eye of the Supreme Lord. Brahma works just as reflected
light of the Supreme Lord. In this way, all these demigods, and the external
energy herself, Durgadevi, and different departmental directors are servants
of the Supreme Lord in the material world.

In the Spiritual World there is another energy, the superior spiritual
energy, or internal energy, which acts under the direction of Yogamaya.
Yogamaya means the internal potency of the Supreme Lord. She also works
under direction, but in the Spiritual World. When the living entity puts himself under the direction of this Yogamaya instead of Mahamaya, the result
is that he becomes gradually, causelessly, a devotee of Krishna. On the other
hand, those who are after material opulence and the advancement of material
happiness put themselves under the care of the material energy, Mahamaya,
or under the care of material demigods such as Lord Shiva and others. In the
Srimad Bhagwatam it is found that when the Gopis of Vrindaban desired to
have Krishna as their husband, they prayed for the gratification of their desire
before the spiritual energy, Yogamaya. And in the Shapta Shati it is found that
King Shurath and another merchant of the name Samadi, wanted opulence
of material existence according to their material mode of Nature—and they
worshipped Mahamaya. Therefore, one should not mistakenly equalize
Yogamaya and Mahamaya.

There is no difference between the Holy Name of the Supreme Lord and
the Supreme Lord Himself. Because the Lord is on the Absolute platform,
there is no difference between His Name and Himself. There are different
Names of the Supreme Lord, such as Paramatma, the Supersoul, Brahman
the Supreme Absolute, Shristikarta the Creator, Narayan the Transcendental
Lord, Rukminiraman the husband of Rukmini, Gopinath the Enjoyer of the
Gopis, and Krishna. The Lord has different Names, and they have different
purposes. When one understands the Supreme Lord as the Creator, He is
different from the aspect of the Lord as Narayan. Some of the Names of the
Lord as the Creator are the conception of the materialistic men. One cannot
fully realize the essence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by understanding the name of the Creator, because this material creation is the function
of the external energy of the Supreme Lord. Such a conception of God includes
only the external feature of the Supreme Lord.

Similarly, when we call the Supreme Lord Brahman, we cannot have any
understanding of the six full opulences of the Supreme Lord. In the Brahman
realization of the Supreme Lord there is no realization of His six opulences
262 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

in full. Therefore, Brahman realization is not complete understanding of the
Supreme Lord, not recognition of eternity, bliss, and knowledge. When we
speak of the Supersoul, that is also not a full realization of the Supreme Personality of God; we understand the Supreme Lord by His All-Pervading
Nature as a partial representation of His opulence. In our transcendental relationship also, one who is a devotee of Narayan in Vaikuntha, cannot realize
the nature of the relationship with Krishna in Goloka Vrindaban. Nor do
devotees of Krishna relish the devotional service to Narayan, because devotional service to Krishna is so attractive that such devotees do not desire to
worship other forms.

Again, the Gopis of Vrindaban do not like to see Krishna as the Husband
of Rukmini, neither do they address Him as Rukminiraman. In Vrindaban,
Krishna is addressed as Radha-Krishna, or Krishna the Property of Radharani.
In the ordinary sense, although the Husband of Rukmini and Radha’s Krishna
are on the same level, still in the Spiritual World the Names are different
understandings of different aspects of this Transcendental Personality. If somebody equalized Rukminiraman and Radharaman and Narayan and any other
Name of the Supreme Lord as all on the same level, there is the fault of overlapping tastes, which is techically called Rasabhasa. Those who are expert
devotees do not accept such amalgamation of different conceptions and aspects
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is against the conclusion of pure
devotional service. But when the conceptions are scrutinizingly discriminated,
many less intelligent men understand such discrimination as bigotry.

Although Sri Krishna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is Superexcellence and beauty, still, when He is amongst the damsels of Vraja, He is known
as Gopijanaballabh; then He becomes the highest perfectional stage for devotees.
The devotees cannot relish the beauty of the Supreme Lord more than this.
In the Srimad Bhagwatam it is confirmed, in the Tenth Canto, 33rd Chapter,
that although Krishna the Son of Devaki is Superexcellence and the last word
of beauty, still, when He is amongst the Gopis, it appears that He is a sublime
Jewel set amongst divine golden craftsmanship.

Lord Chaitanya accepted this statement of the highest realization of the
Supreme Lord as conjugal lover. Still, He requested Ramananda Roy to
advance further.

At this request, Ramananda Roy remarked that this was the first time that
he was requested to go still further than the Gopis in the matter of understanding Krishna. It has been described that there is certainly a transcendental
intimacy between the damsels of Vraja and Krishna, but out of all the Gopis
Pure Love for Krishna 263

the relationship of Sri Radharani with Krishna in conjugal love is the most
perfect stage. No common man can understand the ecstasy of transcendental
love between Radharani and Krishna. Neither can he understand the transcendental flavor of the transcendental love between Krishna and the Gopis.
But if anyone tries to follow in the footsteps of the Gopis, there is the possibility of becoming situated in the highest stage of such transcendental love.
Anyone who wants to be elevated to such a transcendental stage of perfection
should follow in the footsteps of the damsels of Vraja as the assistant maid
servant of such Gopis. Lord Chaitanya exhibited the mood of Srimati Radharani when She is delegated from Dwarka by Sri Krishna.

Such a mode of transcendental love is not possible for any common man.
Therefore, one should not imitate the highest perfectional stage of the loving
attitude exhibited by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. But, if somebody desires to be
in that association, they may follow in the footsteps of the Gopis. In the Padma
Purana it is stated that, as Radharani is dear to Krishna, similarly the Kunda,
known as Radhakunda, is also very dear to Krishna. Radharani is the only
selected Gopi who is dearer to Krishna than all the other Gopis. In the Srimad
Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, 30th Chapter, it is also stated that Radharani and
the Gopis render the highest perfectional loving service to the Lord, and that
the Lord is so pleased with them that He does not wish to go anywhere else
to leave the company of Srimati Radharani.

When Lord Chaitanya heard from Ramananda Roy about the loving
affairs of Krishna and Radharani, still He requested, “You may go further,
on and on.” The Lord said that He was enjoying the description of the loving
affairs between Krishna and the Gopis very relishingly, “As if the river of
nectar is flowing from your lips.” When Krishna danced amongst all the
Gopis, He thought that, “I am not giving any special attention to Radharani.”
So, because amongst the other Gopis, Radharani was not so much an object
of special love, Krishna stole Her away from the area of the Rasa Dance, and
thus exhibited His special favor for Her.

When this was explained by Lord Chaitanya, Ramananda Roy replied,
“Now let us relish the transcendental loving affair between Krishna and Radha
to which there is no comparison in this material world.” When there was a
performance of Rasa Dance, Radharani all of a sudden left the area, as if She
was angry that there was no special favor shown to Her. Krishna was desirous
to see Radharani in order to fulfill the purpose of the Rasa Dance, but in the
absence of Radharani He was sorry, and He went to search Her out. In the
Gita Govinda there 1s a nice verse in which it is stated that the enemy of Kansa,
264 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Krishna, also wanted to be entangled in love affairs with women, and thus
He simply took Radharani, away, and left the company of the other damsels
of Vraja.

Krishna was much afflicted by the absence of Radharani and being thus
distressed in mind, He began to search out Radharani along the banks of the
Yamuna. Failing to find Her, He entered into the bushes of Vrindaban, and
began to lament for Radharani. Ramananda Roy said that when we discuss
the purport of these two special verses from Srimad Bhagwatam, we can relish
the highest nectar of Krishna and Radha’s loving affairs.

Although there were many Gopis to dance with Krishna, still Krishna
was pleased to dance with Radharani especially. In the Rasa Dance Krishna
placed Himself between each two Gopis, but He was present especially with
Radharani.

Radharani was not pleased with the behavior of Krishna, which is described
in Ujjal Nilmoni as follows: “The path of loving affairs is just like the movement of a snake; amongst the young lovers there are two kinds of mental
features, causeless and causal.” So, when Radharani, out of Her anger for not
being treated specially, left the area of the Rasa Dance, Krishna was very sorry
not to see Her in the presence of the other Gopis. The perfection of the Rasa
Dance was considered to be complete on account of the presence of Radharani,
and in Her absence Krishna thought that the Rasa Dance was now disturbed,
and therefore He left the arena to search Her out.

After wandering in several places, when He could not find Radharani,
He was very distressed in mind; therefore it is understood that Krishna could
not enjoy His pleasure potency in the midst of all the Gopis; but in the presence
of Radharani He was satisfied.

This transcendental love between Radharani and Krishna was described
by Ramananda Roy. Lord Chaitanya admitted that, “I came to you for understanding about the transcendental loving affairs of Krishna and Radha, and
Iam very much satisfied that you have described it so nicely. I can understand
now from your version that this is the highest loving state between Krishna
and Radha.” Lord Chaitanya still requested him to try something more:
What are the transcendental features of Krishna and the transcendental features
of Radharani, and what are the transcendental features of the reciprocation
of Their feelings, and what is the love between Them? If you will kindly describe
all this to Me, I think I shall be very much obliged, because I know that except
for you, nobody can describe such things.”

Ramananda Roy in all humility replied, “I do not know anything, but
Pure Love for Krishna 265

whatever You are causing me to say I am saying. I know You are Krishna
Himself, but still You are relishing hearing about Krishna from me. Therefore,
You will excuse me for my faulty expression. I am just trying to express whatever You are causing me to express.”

Lord Chaitanya said, “I am a Mayavadi Sannyasi. I have no knowledge
of the transcendental features of devotional service. By the grace of Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya My mind is now clear and I am trying to understand the
nature of devotional service to Lord Krishna. He recommended that I see you
for understanding Krishna, and he said that Ramananda Roy is the only person
who knows something about love of Krishna. I have come to you recommended by Sarbabhouma Bhattacharya, so you should not hesitate to relate
to Me all the confidential affairs of Radha and Krishna.”

The example Lord Chaitanya set, before Ramananda Roy, was actually
to take the subordinate position. And this has a very great significance. The
purport is that, if anyone is serious about understanding the transcendental
nature of Krishna, he should approach a person who is actually enriched with
Krishna Consciousness. One should not be proud of his material birth, material
opulence, material education, and material beauty and thereby try to conquer
the mind of an advanced student of Krishna Consciousness. Somebody who
goes thus to such an advanced Krishna conscious person, so that he will be
induced favorably toward him, is under a misconception regarding this science.

One should approach a Krishna conscious person with all humility, and
put relevant questions to him, and not challenge him. If anyone goes to challenge him, such a highly elevated Krishna conscious person will not be available
for any tangible service. A challenging, puffed-up person will not be able
to gain from a Krishna conscious man, and will continue to remain in the
material conception of life. Although Lord Chaitanya was born of a high
Brahmin family, and was situated in the highest perfectional stage of Sannyas,
still He showed by His behavior that even an elevated person did not hesitate
to take lessons from Ramananda Roy, although he appeared to be a householder, and situated in social status beneath that of a Brahmin.

Lord Chaitanya clearly showed that a sincere student never minds whether
his spiritual master may be born of a very high grade Brahmin family, or
of a Kshatriya family; or he may be a high grade Sannyasi, or a Brahmachary,
or whatever status of life. Whoever can teach him about Krishna Science is

his Guru.
CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

 

The Supreme Perfection

Whatever he may be, whatever position he may have, if a person is fully
conversant with the science of Krishna, Krishna Consciousness, he can become
a bona fide Spiritual Master, initiator, or teacher of the science. In other words,
the capability of becoming a bona fide Spiritual Master depends on his sufhicient knowledge of the science of Krishna, Krishna Consciousness; it does not
depend on a particular position in society or of birth. This conclusion of Lord
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is not against the Vedic injunction. On the strength
of this conclusion, Lord Chaitanya, previously known as Viswambhar, accepted
a Spiritual Master, Iswara Puri, who was a sannyasi. Similarly, Lord Nityananda Prabhu also accepted as his Spiritual Master Madavendra Puri, another
sannyasi. This Madhavendra Puri is also known as Laksmipati Tirtha. Sri Adwaita
Acharya also accepted this Madhavendra Puri as his Spiritual Master. Similarly,
another great Acharya, Sri Rasikananda, accepted as his Spiritual Master Sri
Shymananda, who was not born of a Brahmin family. So also Ganganarayanachakravarty accepted as his Spiritual Master Das Gadadhar. In ancient days
there was a hunter whose name was Dharma. He also became the Spiritual

266
The Supreme Perfection 267

Master of many persons. There are plain instructions in Mahabharata and
Srimad Bhagwatam (Seventh Canto, 11th Chapter) in which it is stated that
a person should be accepted—either a Brahmin or a Kshatriya or a Vaishya
or a Sudra—by his personal qualification, and not by birth.

And, if such personal qualifications become applicable to a person who
is born in a family outside the ordinary field of his actual qualification, he
should be accepted by his personal qualification alone. For example, if a man
is born of a Brahmin family but his personal qualification is that of a Sudra,
then he should be accepted as a Sudra. Similarly, if a person is born of a Sudra
family but his personal characteristics are those of a Brahmin, he should be
accepted as a Brahmin. All Shastric injunctions, and the version of great sages
and authorities—and their practical behavior as well—establish that a bona
fide Spiritual Master is notnecessarily of the caste Brahmin class. The only qualification is that he must be conversant in the science of Krishna, Krishna Consciousness. That will make him perfectly eligible to become a Spiritual Master.
That is the conclusion of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu in His discussions with
Ramananda Roy.

In the Hari Bhakti Vilasa there is the statement that, if there is a bona fide
Spriritual Master born of a Brahmin family, and another who is qualified but
born of a Sudra family, one should accept the Spiritual Master who is born
of the Brahmin family, and not of the Sudra family. This statement is somewhat
of a compromise to social understanding; but is not meant for spiritual understanding. For persons who prefer to count social status as more important than
spiritual status, this injunction of the Hari Bhakti Vilasa is applicable. But not
for the persons who are spiritually serious. For a person spiritually serious,
the instruction of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is that anyone—never mind what
he is—if he is conversant with Krishna science must be accepted as the Spiritual Master.

There are many injunctions in the Padma Purana which state as follows:
a highly elevated, spiritually advanced devotee of the Lord is always a first
class devotee, and therefore he is a Spiritual Master. But a highly elevated person
born in a Brahmin family, who is not a devotee of the Lord, cannot be a Spiritual Master. A person born in a Brahmin family may be conversant with all the
rituals of the Vedic Scripture, but if he is not a pure devotee of the Lord, he
cannot be a Spiritual Master. In all the Shastras, the chief qualification of a bona
fide Spiritual Master is that he must be a qualified person conversant in the
science of Krishna.

Lord Chaitanya therefore requested Ramananda Roy to go on teaching
268 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Him, and not to hesitate about speaking on the science of Krishna because
Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was a sannyasi in the renounced order of life.
He requested him to go on speaking on the Pastimes of Radha and Krishna.

Ramananda Roy then humbly submitted: “Because You are asking me
to speak on the Pastimes of Radha and Krishna, of course I must obey Your
order, and whatever You would like me to say, I will speak in that way.”
Ramananda Roy humbly submitted himself as a puppet, and Lord Chaitanya
was the puppeteer. So, he wanted to dance according to the will of Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu. He expressed that his tongue was just like a string instrument,
and “You are the player of the string instrument.” So, as Lord Chaitanya
would play, Ramananda Roy would vibrate the sound.

He said that Lord Krishna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Source of all incarnations, and the Cause of all causes. There are innumerable
Vaikuntha planets, and there are innumerable incarnations and expansions of the
Supreme Lord, and there are innumerable universes also. Of all these existences
the Supreme Lord Krishna is the only Source. His transcendental Body is
composed of eternity and blissfulness and knowledge, and He is known as
the Son of Maharaj Nanda, or as the Inhabitant of Goloka Vrindaban; He
is full with six opulences—namely, all wealth, all strength, all fame, all beauty,
all knowledge, and all renunciation.

In the Brahma Samhita, Fifth Chapter, 1st verse, it is confirmed that Krishna
is the Supreme Lord, He is the Lord of all lords, and His transcendental Body
is Sat-chit-ananda. And no one is the Source of Krishna, but Krishna is the
Source of everyone. He is the Supreme Cause of all causes. He is Resident of
Vrindaban, and very attractive, just like Cupid. One can worship Him by
Kam Gayatri Mantra.

The description of Vrindaban is stated in the Brahma Samhita as follows:
the transcendental land of Vrindaban is always spiritual. That spiritual land
is full of Goddesses of Fortune, who are known as Gopis; and they are all
beloved of Krishna, and Krishna is the only Lover of all those Gopis. The
trees of that land are all desire trees: you can have anything you want from
any tree. The land is made of touchstone, and the water is nectar, and all
speech is song, and all walking is dancing, and the constant companion is the
flute. Everything is self-illuminated, just as we experience the sun and the moon
in this material world.

The human form of life is meant for understanding this transcendental
land of Vrindaban, and one who is fortunate should cultivate knowledge
of Vrindaban and the residents of Vrindaban.
The Supreme Perfection 269

In that Supreme Abode, there are the Surabhi cows, who are overflooding
the land with milk. In that land, the Supreme Abode of Krishna, even a moment
is not misused. Therefore, there is no past, present or future. An expansion of
that Vrindaban, the Supreme Abode of Krishna, is here also on this Earth.
Superior devotees worship this earthly Vrindaban as being as good as the
Supreme Abode Vrindaban. Nobody can appreciate Vrindaban without
being highly elevated in spiritual knowledge, Krishna Consciousness. Vrindaban in ordinary experience appears to be just like ordinary land; but in the
eyes of a highly elevated devotee, it is as good as the original Vrindaban.
A great saintly person, an Acharya, has expressed this in his song: “When
will my mind be cleared of all dirty things, and when shall I be able to see
Vrindaban as It is? And when shall I be able to understand the literature left
by the Goswamins—so that I will be able to understand the transcendental
Pastimes of Radha and Krishna?”

The loving affairs in Vrindaban between Krishna and the Gopis are also
transcendental. They appear to be like the ordinary lust of this material world,
but there is a gulf of difference between the moods of Vrindaban and this
material world. In the material world there may be the temporary awakening
of lust, but it disappears after so-called satisfaction. But in the Spiritual World
the love between the Gopis and Krishna is constantly going on, and it is increasing at every moment. That is the difference between the love of the transcendental world, and the lust of the material world. The lust of so-called love
arising out of this body, is as temporary as the body itself. But the love in the
Spiritual World is on the spiritual platform, and the spirit soul is eternal. And
so that love is also eternal. Therefore, Krishna is addressed as the evergreen
Cupid.

Lord Krishna is worshipped by the Gayatri Mantra, and the specific Mantra
is called Kamagayatri. The explanation of the Kamagayatri Mantra is stated
in the Vedic literature: that sound vibration which can elevate one from
mental concoction is called Gayatri. The Kamagayatri Mantra is composed of
244 syllables, and is stated as follows:

Klim kamadevaya vidmahe puspavanaya dheemahi tanna’ nanga prachodayat.
This Kamagayatri is received from the Spiritual Master when a disciple is far
advanced by chanting Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare
Hare] Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. In other words, this
Kamagayatri Mantra and Sanksar, or reformation of a perfect Brahmin, are
offered by the Spiritual Master to a student when he sees that the disciple is
advanced in spiritual knowledge. Even such Kamagayatri is not uttered under
2:70 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

certain circumstances. Still, the chanting of Hare Krishna is sufficient to elevate
one to the highest spiritual platform.

In the Brahma Samhita there is a nice description of the flute of Krishna.
The purport of the description is thus: “When Krishna began to play on His
flute, the sound vibration entered into the ear of Brahma as the Vedic Mantra,
OM. This OM is composed of three letters: A, U, and M, or a description
of our relationship with the Supreme Lord. It describes our activities to achieve
the highest perfection of love, and the actual position of the loving condition
in the spiritual platform. When the sound vibration of Krishna’s flute became
expressed through the mouth of Brahma, it became Gayatri. Therefore, being
influenced by the sound vibration of the flute of Krishna, Brahma, the supreme
creature and first living entity of this material world, was initiated as a Brahmin.

This remark on Brahma’s becoming a Brahmin, initiated by the flute of
Krishna, is confirmed by Srila Jiva Goswami. When Brahma was enlightened
by the Gayatri Mantra through the flute of Krishna, he became possessed of
all Vedic knowledge. He acknowledged the benediction offered to him by
Krishna, and thus he became the original Spiritual Master of all living entities.

The word Klim added to the Gayatri Mantra is explained in Brahma Samhita
as the transcendental seed of love of Godhead, or the seed of the Kamagayatri.
The object is Krishna, Who is the evergreen Cupid. And, by utterance of
Klim Mantra, Krishna is worshipped. In the Gopal Tapini Upanishad, it is further
stated that when we speak of Krishna as Cupid we should not misunderstand
that He is the Cupid of this material world. As we have explained, Vrindaban
is the Spiritual Abode of Krishna, and so this word Cupid is also spiritual and
transcendental. One should not misunderstand the material Cupid and Krishna
as being on the same level. Material Cupid is the attraction of this external
flesh and body, but the spiritual Cupid is the attraction of the Supersoul upon
the individual soul.

Actually, lust and the sex urge are there in spiritual life, but because the
spirit soul is now embodied in material elements, that spiritual urge is expressed
through this material body; and therefore it is pervertedly reflected. When
one becomes actually conversant in the science of Krishna Consciousness,
he can understand that his material affection of sex life is abominable, whereas
spiritual sex life is desirable.

Spiritual sex life is of two kinds: one completely in the constitutional
position of the self, and the other according to the object. When one has understood the truth about this life but is not completely out of the material contamination, then, although there is an understanding of spiritual life, he is
The Supreme Perfection 271

not factually situated in the transcendental Abode, Vrindaban. When, however,
one becomes free from all bodily sex urges, he is actually situated in the
Supreme Abode of Vrindaban. When one is situated in that stage of life, the
Kamagayatri and Kamavija Mantra can be uttered by the student.

Ramananda Roy then explained that Krishna is Attractive both for men
and women, for the movable and the immovable—for all living entities.
Therefore, He is called the transcendental Cupid. And He quoted a verse from
Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, 32nd Chapter, where the Lord appeared
before the damsels of Vraja just like Cupid, while smiling and playing His
flute.

There are different kinds of devotees of the Lord, and they have different
aptitudes and relationships with the Supreme Lord. Any kind of relationship
with the Supreme Lord is as good as any other, because the central point is
Krishna. In the Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu there is a nice verse in this connection,
which states as follows: “Krishna is the Reservoir of all pleasure, and by the
spiritual luster of His Body, He is always attracting the Gopis, especially
Taraka, Pali, Shyama, and Lalita. Krishna is very dear to Radharani, the foremost Gopi.” Like Krishna, the Gopis were glorified by His Pastime activities.
In other words, there are different kinds of specific relationships with Krishna,
and anyone who is attracted to Krishna by a particular flavor is glorified.

Krishna is so beautiful and transcendental, and so attractive, that sometimes
He becomes attractive to Himself. There is a very nice verse in Gita Govinda:
“My dear friend, do you see how Krishna is enjoying His transcendental Pastimes in the springtime, by expanding the beauty of His Personal Body?
And, just like the most beautiful moon, His soft legs and hands are being used
on the bodies of the Gopis, and He is embracing them by different parts of the
body, and thus He is so beautiful! Krishna is so beautiful that He is attractive
even to Narayan, and not only to Narayan—He is also attracting the Goddesses of Fortune who associate with Narayan.”

In Srimad Bhagwatam there is a nice verse in this connection. The Bhuma
Purusa said to Krishna, “My dear Krishna and Arjuna, just to see You I have
brought the Brahmins before You.” This is in connection with Arjuna’s attempt
to save some youths, who he heard had died untimely at Dwarka. And when
he failed to save them, Krishna took him to the Bhuma Purusa, and when
the Bhuma Purusa brought forth those dead bodies as living entities he expressed
his feelings in the following words: “Both of You appeared for the preservation
of religious principles in this world, and to annihilate the demoniac persons.”
In other words, the Bhuma Purusa was also attracted by the beauty of Krishna,
272 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

and under some pretext He wanted to see Krishna and this Pastime was invented
by him. There is another nice verse in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto,
16th Chapter, in which it is stated, “My dear Lord, we cannot estimate how
this fallen snake got the opportunity of being kicked by Your Lotus Feet,
for which even the Goddess of Fortune underwent austerities for several
years—just to see You.” This was spoken by the wife of Kaliya, in connection
with Kaliya’s punishment by Krishna.

How Krishna is attracted by His own beauty is also stated in the Laleeta
Madhav, Eighth Chapter, 20th verse. Krishna, by seeing His own picture, is
lamenting, “How nice this picture is, how glorious this picture is. I am also
becoming attracted just like Radhika is attracted by this picture.” Krishna
was attracted as much as Radhika, or Radharani, was when She saw the picture.

Thus, Ramananda Roy explained about the beauty of Krishna in summary.

He again began to speak about the spiritual energy of Krishna, headed
by Srimati Radharani. It is said that Krishna has immense expansions of energy,
out of which three energies are predominant: one is called internal energy,
the second is called external energy, and the third is called marginal energy,
or the living entity. This is confirmed in the Vishnu Purana, 6th Chapter:
Vishnu has one energy, which is called spiritual energy, and it is manifested
in three ways. When spiritual energy is overwhelmed by ignorance, that is
called marginal energy. So far as spiritual energy is concerned—because Krishna
is a combination of eternity, bliss, and knowledge, the spiritual energy is
also exhibited in three forms. So far as Krishna’s bliss and peacefulness are concerned, His spiritual energy is manifested as pleasure-giving potency, His eternity
is manifestive energy, and His knowledge is manifested as spiritual perfection.
It is confirmed in the Vishnu Purana, First Canto, 12th Chapter: “The pleasure
potency of Krishna can give Krishna transcendental pleasure and bliss.” Therefore, when Krishna wants to enjoy pleasure, He exhibits His own spiritual
potency, known as Alhadini.

Krishna in His Spiritual From enjoys the spiritual energy, and that is the
sum and substance of the Radha Krishna Pastime. These Radha Krishna Pastimes can be understood by elevated devotees only. From the ordinary platform
one should not try to understand this Radha Krishna Potency, and their Pastimes. People only misunderstand it as being material.

When the pleasure potency is further condensed, it is called Mahabhava.
Srimati Radharani, the eternal Consort of Krishna is a personification of that
Mahabhava. This Mahabhava representation is explained by Rupa Goswami
The Supreme Perfection 273

in his book Ujjal Nilmoni in the Second Canto, 2nd Sloka. It is stated there,
that although there were two competitors in love of Krishna, Radharani
and Chandravali; still, by comparison, it appears that Radharani is the best,
and She is possessed of the Mahabhava Svarupa. Therefore, this Mahabhava
Svarupa, or personification, is applicable to Radharani only, and no one else.

Mahabhava is full of the pleasure potency, and is an exhibition of the highest
attitude of love towards Krishna. She is therefore known throughout the world
as the Most Beloved of Krishna. And Her name is always associated with Krishna, as Radha Krishna.

Brahma Samhita also confirms this: Krishna expands Himself by His pleasure
potency in the Spiritual World, and the potencies are all non-different from
Krishna in the Absolute. Krishna, although He is always enjoying the company
of His expansions of the pleasure potency, is All-pervading. Therefore, Brahma
offers his respectful obeisances to Govinda, the Cause of all causes.

As Krishna is the highest emblem of spiritual perfection, so Radharani
is the highest emblem of the spiritual pleasure potency meant for satisfying Krishna. Krishna is unlimited, and so Radharani is also unlimited, for His satisfaction.
Krishna is satisfied by seeing Radharani, but Radharani also expands Herself
in such a way that Krishna still wants to enjoy more. And, because Krishna
was unable to estimate the pleasure potency of Radharani, He wanted to accept
the role of Radharani. That combination is called Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.

Ramananda Roy then began to explain that Radharani is therefore the
supreme emblem of the pleasure potency of Krishna. And Radharani expands
Herself into different forms, known as Lalita Visakha and Her confidential associates. The Characteristics of Srimati Radharani are explained by Rupa Goswami
in his book Uljal Nilmoni, and they can be understood as follows: The
body of Radharani is an evolution of transcendental pleasure. That body is
decorated with flowers and fragrant aromas, complete with transcendental
love for Krishna. That is the personification. That transcendental body takes
birth three times: first in the water of mercy, second in the water of useful
beauty, and third in the water of youthful luster. After taking birth three times
in that way, covered with shining garments and decorated with His Personal
beauty, which is compared with cosmetics (Her beauty being the highest artistry) Her body is decorated with ornaments of the ecstasies of spiritual emotion—
trembling, tears, checking of the body in transcendental pleasure, stopping
of all functions of the body, perspiration, choking of the voice, blood pressure,
madness, and stumbling.

There are nine symptoms of decorative transcendental pleasure potency.
274 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Five are by Her expansion of personal beauty, decorated with garlands of flowers; and Her patient calmness is compared with a covering of cloths, cleansed
by camphor. Her confidential agony for Krishna is the knot of Her hair, and the
mark of telok on Her forehead is Her fortune. The hearing of Radharani is
fixed on Krishna’s Name and Fame, eternally. By chewing betal nuts the lips
become reddish. Similarly, the complete attachment of Radharani to Krishna
has blackened the border of Her eyes. It can be compared to ointment, due to
Nature joking with Radha and Krishna. Her smiling is just like the taste
of camphor. The garland of separation moves on Her body when She lies down
on the bed of pride, within the room of aroma. Her breast is covered by the
blouse of anger, out of ecstatic affection for Krishna; and a stringed instrument
is Hers for Her reputation of being the best amongst all the girlfriends of Krishna.
She puts Her hand on the shoulder of His youthful posture. Although She possesses So many transcendental qualities, still She is always engaged in the service
of Krishna.

Srimati Radharani is decorated with Suddipta Sattvik emotions, which
include sometimes tribulation, sometimes pacification. All these transcendental
ecstasies are symptoms of the body of Srimati Radharani. Suddipta Sattvik
emotion is when a lover is overwhelmed with certain kinds of feelings which
he or she cannot check. Radharani has another emotion which is called Kilakinchita. This Kilakinchita emotion has twenty different manifestations. Such
manifestations are partly due to the body, due to the mind, and due to habit.
So far as the bodily emotions are concerned, they are called posture and movement. So far as the emotions of the mind are concerned, they are the exposition of beauty, luster, complexion, mellows, talking, magnanimity and patience. As far as habitual emotions are concerned, they are pastimes, enjoyment,
preparation, forgetfulness.

There is the fortune telok on the forehead of Srimati Radharani, and She
has a locket of Premvaichittya. Premvaichittya is the symptom of a lover that
occurs when the lover and the beloved meet together, and still have a fear of
separation.

Srimati Radharani is fifteen days younger than Krishna. She always keeps
Her hand on the shoulder of Her friends; and She is always talking and thinking
of Pastimes with Krishna. She always offers Krishna, by Her sweet talks, a
kind of intoxication. She is always prepared to fulfill all the desires of Sri
Krishna. In other words, She is the supply source for all the demands of Sri
Krishna, and She is qualified with unnatural or uncommon qualities for the
satisfaction of Krishna.
The Supreme Perfection 275

There is a nice verse in the Govinda Lilamrita in which is stated as follows:
“Who is the breeding ground of Krishna’s affection? The answer is, it is only
Srimati Radhika. Who is the most dear lovable object of Krishna? The answer
is, it is only Srimati Radhika, and nobody else.” Sheen in the hair and a moistness in the eyes, and firmness in the breast—all these qualities are there in
Srimati Radhika. Therefore only Srimati Radhika is able to fulfill all the
desires of Krishna, and nobody else can.

Sottabhama is another competitor of Srimati Radharani, but she always
desires to come to the standard of Srimati Radharani. Srimati Radharani
is so expert in every affair that all the damsels of Vraja come and learn all those
arts from Her. She is so extraordinarily beautiful that even the Goddess of Fortune and Parvati, the wife of Lord Shiva, also desire to be elevated to the standard of Srimati Radharani’s beauty. Arundhuthi, who is known as the most
chaste lady in the universe, desires to learn the standard of chastity from Srimati Radharani. Even Lord Krishna cannot estimate the highly transcendental
qualities of Srimati Radharani; and therefore it is not possible for any ordinary man to estimate those qualities.

Lord Chaitanya, after hearing from Sri Ramananda Roy about the qualities
of Srimati Radharani and Krishna, desired to hear from him about the reciprocal exchange of love between Radharani and Krishna. Krishna is described
by Ramananda Roy as Dhirlalita, and He is always engaged in love affairs
with Radharani. Dhirlalita describes a person who is very cunning and youthful,
and always expert in joking, without any anxiety, and always subservient to
his girlfriend. This Krishna is always engaged in the bushes of Vrindaban to
enjoy lusty activities with Radharani, and thus He successfully carried out the
instincts of lust.

In the Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu there is a very nice verse in connection with
the dealings of Radha and Krishna, and it is said there: “This Krishna, by His
impudent and daring talks about sex indulgence, obliged Srimati Radhika
to close her eyes and taking the opportunity of the closed eyes of Srimati
Radharani, Krishna painted many pictures on the breasts of Radharani, which
was the subject matter for joking for the friends of Radharani. Krishna was
always engaged in such lustful activities, and thus He made successful His
primary youthful life.”

On hearing of these transcendental activities between Radha and Krishna,
Lord Chaitanya said, “My dear Ramananda, what you have explained about
the transcendental Pastimes of Sri Radha and Krishna is perfectly right, but
still there must be something more I should like to hear from you.”
276 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

On hearing this, Ramananda Roy said, “It is very difficult for me to express
anything beyond this. But I can only say that there is an emotional activity
which is called Prembilasa Bivarta. 1 may try to explain the Prembilasa. I do
not know whether You will be happy to hear it, but I must explain it to You.”
In the Prembilasa emotion there are two kinds of emotional activities, which
are called separation and meeting. That transcendental separation is so acute
that it becomes more ecstatic than meeting. Ramananda Roy was expert
in understanding such highly elevated dealings between Radha and Krishna,
and he composed a very nice song which he narrated to the Lord. The purport
of that song is as follows: the lover and the beloved, before their meeting,
by the exchange of their transcendental activities, generate a kind of emotion.
That emotion is called Raga, or attraction. Srimati Radharani expressed Her
willingness, that “This attraction and affection between Ourselves has risen
to the highest extent”—but the cause of such attraction is Radharani Herself.
“Whatever the cause may be, that affection between Yourself and Myself,”
said Radharani, “has mixed Us in oneness. Now it is the time of separation,
so I cannot see the history of the evolution of this love between You and Me.
There was no other cause or mediator in Our love, the only cause was Our
meeting and visionary exchange of feelings.”

This exchange of feelings between Krishna and Radharani is very difficult
to understand, unless one is elevated onto the pure platform of goodness.
Such transcendental reciprocation between Radha and Krishna is not possible
to understand even on the platform of material goodness. One has to transcend
even material goodness in order to understand. Such an exchange of feelings
between Radha and Krishna is not any subject matter of the material world.
Even the highest mental speculators cannot understand this, directly or indirectly. Material activities are manifested either for the gross body or the subtle
mind, but this exchange of feeling between Radha and Krishna is beyond such
intellectual mental speculation. This transcendental subject matter can be
understood by purified senses, freed from all the designations of the material
world.

Purified senses can understand these transcendental features, but those who
are impersonalists, who have no knowledge of spiritual senses, can simply
discriminate within the scope of the material senses, and cannot understand the
spiritual exchange or spiritual-sensual activities. Persons who are elevated in
experimental knowledge can simply satisfy their blunt material senses, either
by gross bodily activities or by mental speculation. Everything generated from
the body or the mind is always imperfect and perishable, but transcendental
The Supreme Perfection 277

spiritual activity is always bright and wonderful. Pure love on the transcendental platform is the symbol of purity—this means without any material
affection, or completely spiritual. Affection for matter is perishable, therefore
the inebriety of sex is there in the material world, but there is no such inebriety
in the Spiritual World. Hindrances in the performance of sense satisfaction
are the cause of material distress, and that is not exactly comparable with spiritual separation. In spiritual separation there is no inebriety or ineffectiveness
as with matter.

Lord Chaitanya admitted that this is the highest position of transcendental
loving reciprocation, and He said to Ramananda Roy, “By your grace only
I have been able to understand such a high transcendental position. This transcendental position cannot be achieved without the performance of transcendental activities; so would you kindly explain to Me how I can raise Myself to
this platform?”

Ramananda replied, “It is similarly difficult for me to make You understand,
but so far as Iam concerned, I can speak what You would like me to say before
You. For no one can escape Your Supreme Will. There is nobody in the world
who can surpass Your Supreme Will, and although I appear to be speaking,
I am not actually the speaker—You are speaking. Therefore, You are both
the speaker and the audience. Let me speak as You will me to speak, about the
performance required to achieve this highest transcendental position.” Ramananda Roy then began:

The transcendental activities of Radha and Krishna are very confidential.
They are not to be understood in the emotional relationship of master and
servant, friend and friend, or parent and son to the Supreme Lord. This confidential subject matter can be understood in the association of the damsels
of Vraja, because such confidential activities have arisen from the feelings and
emotions of those damsels. Without the association of Vraja, no one can nourish
or cherish such transcendental understanding. In other words, these confidential
Pastimes of Radha and Krishna have expanded through the mercy of the
damsels—and without their mercy we cannot understand. One has to adopt
this life, to follow in the footsteps of the damsels of Vraja, and then one can
understand.

When one is actually situated in that understanding, he is eligible to enter
into the confidential Pastimes of Radha and Krishna. There is no other alternative way to understand this confidential part of the Pastimes of Radha and
Krishna. This is confirmed in the Govinda Lilamrita, in a verse which reads
as follows: “The emotional exchanges of Radha and Krishna, although mani278 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

fest and very happy and expanded and unlimited, are limited for understanding
to the damsels of Vraja only, or to their followers.” As no one can understand
the expansion of spiritual energy of the Supreme Lord without the causeless
mercy of the Supreme Lord, similarly, no one can understand the transcendental
sex life between Radha and Krishna without following in the footsteps of the
damsels of Vraja. There are different names for the associates of Radharani:
they are called Shaktis, or personal associates, and also the Manjarys, the near
assistants.

It is very difficult to express their dealings with Krishna, as they have no
desire to mix with or to enjoy Krishna Personally. But they are always ready
to help Radharani be with Krishna. Their affection for Krishna and Radharani
is so pure that they are simply satisfied when Radha and Krishna are together,
and they simply enjoy the transcendental pleasure of seeing Radha and Krishna
combined, united. The actual form of Radharan1i is just like a creeper embracing
the tree of Krishna. The damsels of Vraja, the associates of Radharani, are just
like the leaves and flowers of the creeper. And when the creeper embraces the
tree, automatically the leaves and flowers also take the opportunity to embrace
the tree, along with the creeper.

This is confirmed in the Govinda Lilamrita as follows: Radharani is expressed
as the expansion of the pleasure potency of Krishna. As She is compared with
the creeper, Her associates, the damsels of Vraja, are just like the flowers and
and leaves of that creeper. When Radharani and Krishna enjoy Themselves,
the damsels of Vraja enjoy the pleasure more than Radharani Herself. Although
the associates of Radharani do not expect any personal attention from Krishna,
still Radharani is so pleased with Her associates that She arranges a meeting of
Krishna and the damsels of Vraja, individually. By many transcendental
maneuvers, Radharani tries to combine or unite the associates with Krishna.
Radharani takes more pleasure in these meetings than in Her own affairs.
And, when Krishna sees that both Radharani and Her associates are pleased
by His association, He becomes more satisfied. Such association and reciprocation of love has nothing to do with material lust, but because it resembles such
unification between man and woman, or the similarity to the combination
of man and woman is there, therefore sometimes it is called, in transcendental
language, transcendental lust.

In Goutamiyatantra this combination of Radharani and Her relationships
with Krishna is explained as follows: “Lust means that one is attached to one’s
personal sense gratification. But, so far as the associates of Radharani and Radharani Herself are concerned, They had no desire for Their personal sense graThe Supreme Perfection 279

tification. They want only to satisfy Krishna.” In the Srimad Bhagwatam this
is further confirmed in the Tenth Canto, 31st Chapter, when the Gopis or
damsels of Vraja were talking among themselves, as follows: “My dear Friend,
Krishna, You are now roaming in the forest with Your bare feet, which You
may sometimes keep on our breasts, and although we keep Your Foot on our
breasts, still we think that our breasts are so hard, and Your sole is so soft.
Now You are wandering in the forest, traversing over the particles of stones;
and we do not know how You are feeling, because You are our life and soul.
And so Your displeasure in travelling over the rough stone is giving us much
distress.” Such feelings of the damsels of Vraja, are the highest emotions of
Krishna Consciousness, and anyone who becomes captivated by Krishna Consciousness approaches this highest level of the Gopis.

There are sixty-four kinds of devotional service, and by performing these
regulative principles one can rise up to the stage of this unconditional devotion
of the Gopis. Affection for Krishna exactly on the level of the Gopis is called
Raganuga, spontaneous love. In that spontaneous loving affair with Krishna,
there is no necessity of following the Vedic rules and regulations.

There are different kinds of personal devotees of Lord Krishna in the transcendental Abode. For example, the servants of Krishna known as Raktak
and Bhadrak are friends of Krishna, just like Sridham and Subhad; and there
are parents of Krishna, just like Nanda and Yasoda, who are also engaged in the
service of Krishna in their different transcendental emotions. One who desires
to enter into the Supreme Abode of Krishna may take shelter of one of the
above transcendental servitors, and then execute loving service in such a way
as to achieve the highest result of transcendental affection with Krishna at the
end. In other words, the devotee in this material world who executes loving
service in pursuance of the activities of those eternal associates of Krishna also
achieves the same post when he is perfect.

The sages who are known in the Upanishads and in Sruti also desire the post
of the Gopis, and they also follow in the footsteps of the Gopis in order to
achieve that highest goal of life. This is confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam,
Tenth Canto, 86th Chapter, as follows: The sages practice Pranayam, a trance,
by controlling the breathing process and the mind and the senses, by the mystic
Yoga practice. And thus try to enter into the Supreme Brahman, or be merged
into the Supreme. The same thing is also obtained by persons who, atheist by
Nature, fight the principle of the existence of God; if they are killed by an
incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they also achieve the same
result, or merging into the Brahman existence of the Supreme Lord. But
280 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

the damsels of Vrindaban worship Sri Krishna, being bitten by Him as a person
is bitten by a snake, because Krishna’s body is compared with the body of a
snake. The snake’s body never goes straight but it always curling, and as Krishna
stands always in three-curved postures, He is compared to the snake. This
snake, Krishna, had bitten the Gopis with transcendental love, and they were
in a better position than all the mystic Yogis or the persons who desired to
merge into the Supreme Brahman. Therefore, the sages of Dundakarannya
also follow in the footsteps of the damsels of Vraja, in order to achieve a similar position. By a simple execution of the regular principles one cannot achieve
that position; not unless and until one is seriously following the principles of the
Gopis. This is confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, 9th Chapter,
by a verse in which it is stated that Lord Sri Krishna, the Son of Srimati Yasoda,
is not so easily available to persons following the principles of mental speculation. But He is very easily available for all kinds of living beings who
follow the path of devotional service.

There are many pseudo devotional parties claiming to belong to Lord
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu’s sect. Such pseudo devotional parties in the sect of
Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, dress themselves up artificially as the damsels
of Vraja. This sort of dressing is not approved by advanced spiritualists or
advanced students of devotional service. Such dressing of the outward material
body is another foolishness of the concept of the body being the soul. They
are mistaken in considering that the spiritual body of Krishna and Radharani
and their associates, the damsels of Vraja, are of material Nature. One should
know perfectly that all such manifestations are expansions of eternal bliss and
knowledge in the transcendental world. They have nothing to do with this
material body. Therefore, the body, the dress, the decoration, and the activities of the damsels of Vrindaban do not belong to this material cosmic manifestation. Such damsels of Vrindaban are not subject matter for the attraction
of persons who are in the material world. They are the transcendental attraction for the All-Attractive. Krishna is All-Attractive—therefore His name is
“Krishna.” But the damsels of Vrajabhumi, Vrindaban, are attractive even
to Krishna. Therefore, they are not anything of this material world.

If somebody wrongly thinks that this material body is as perfect as the spiritual body, and thus begins to worship by imitating the damsels of Vrindaban,
he becomes part and parcel of the Mayavadi or impersonal philosophy. The
impersonalists also recommend a process of Aham Grahapasana. This process
recommends that one should worship his own body as the Supreme. By
this material way of thinking, the pseudo transcendentalists dress themselves
The Supreme Perfection 281

as the damsels of Vraja; but they are to be taken as the Aham Grahapasana,
and are not acceptable in devotional service.

Srila Jiva Goswami, the most authentic Acharya of the Gaudiya Sampradaya, has condemned this attempt by imitators. The process of transcendental
realization is to follow in the footsteps of the associates of the Supreme Lord,
Krishna. And so, to think of oneself as one of the direct associates of the
Supreme Lord is also condemned. The process, according to authorized
Vaishnava principles, is that one should follow a particular devotee and not
think of himself an associate.

Sri Ramananda Roy explained, therefore, that one should accept the mood
of the damsels of Vraja. In Chaitanya Charitamrita it is clearly said that one
should accept the emotional activities, and not imitate the dress, of the associates
of Krishna, the damsels of Vraja. One should always think within himself
about the dealings of Radha and Krishna in the transcendental world. He
should think of Radha and Krishna all twenty-four hours, and be engaged
in Their service within himself; not externally change his dress only. This
is called the mood of the associates of friends of Radharani; and, by following
the associates of Radharani, one can ultimately achieve the perfectional stage
of being transferred to Goloka Vrindaban, the transcendental Abode of Krishna.

This mood of emotional pursuit of the Gopis is called Siddhadeha. Siddhadeha means the pure spiritual body which is beyond the senses, mind, and intelligence. Siddhadeha is the purified soul; and is just suitable for serving the
Supreme Lord. No one can serve the Supreme Lord as His associate without
being situated in that perfectly pure spiritual identity. That identity is completely free from all material contamination. It is stated in the Bhagavad Gita
that a person materially contaminated transmigrates to another material body
by material consciousness. At the time of death he thinks in that way, and therefore is transferred to another material body. Similarly, when one is situated
in his pure spiritual identity, and thinks of spiritual loving service rendered
to the Supreme Lord, he is transferred into the Spiritual Kingdom, to enter
into the association of Krishna. In other words, to think of Krishna and His
associates in the spiritual identity is the qualification for transference to the
Spriritual Kingdom.

No one can contemplate or think of the activities of the Spiritual Kingdom
without being situated in pure spiritual identity. That pure spiritual identity
is called Siddhadeha. Ramananda Roy therefore expressed himself to the
effect that, without attending to that Siddhadeha, no one can become an associ282 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

ate of the damsels, or render service directly to the Personality of Godhead,
Krishna, and His eternal consort, Radharani. He quoted, in this connection,
a nice verse from the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, 47th Chapter, in which is
stated the following: “Neither the Goddess of Fortune, Lakshmi, nor even
the damsels of the Heavenly Kingdom could attain the facilities of the damsels
of Vrajabhumi—and what to speak of others?”

Lord Chaitanya was very satisfied upon hearing this statement from
Ramananda Roy, and He embraced him. Both of them began to cry in ecstasy in that transcendental realization. Both the Lord and Ramananda Roy
discussed throughout the whole night the transcendental Pastimes of Radharani
and Krishna, and in the morning They separated. Ramananda left to go to his
place, and the Lord went to take His bath.

At the time of separation, Ramananda Roy fell down at the feet of Lord
Chaitanya and prayed as follows: “My dear Lord, You have come just to
deliver me from this mire of nescience. Therefore I request that You may remain
here at least for ten days, and You can purify my mind of this material contamination. There is nobody else who can deliver such transcendental love
of God.”

The Lord replied, “I have come to you to purify Myself by hearing from
you of the transcendental Pastimes of Krishna and Radha; and I am so fortunate, for you are the only teacher of such transcendental Pastimes. I do not
find anyone else in this world who can realize this transcendental loving reciprocation between Radha and Krishna. You are requesting Me to stay here for ten
days, but I feel that I wish to remain with you for the rest of My life. Please
come to Jagannath Puri, My headquarters, and We may remain together for the
rest of My life, and I can pass My remaining days in understanding Krishna
and Radha by your association.”

Sriman Ramananda Roy came to see the Lord the next day in the evening,
and there were discourses on this transcendental subject matter. And the Lord
again began to inquire from Ramananda Roy, as follows: “What is the highest
standard of education?” Ramananda Roy immediately replied that the highest
standard of education is to know the science of Krishna. The standard of material education is sense gratification, but the standard of spiritual education,
especially the highest standard, is to know the science of Krishna. In the Srimad
Bhagwatam, Fourth Canto, 29th Chapter, 47th verse, it is stated that work which
pleases the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the highest standard of work,
and the science or knowledge which places one in full Krishna Consciousness
is the highest standard of knowledge. Similarly, Prahlad Maharaj, while
The Supreme Perfection 283

instructing his childhood friends at school, also stated that hearing or chanting
of the Lord, remembering, worshipping, praying, serving, making friendship
with Krishna and offering everything to Him, is to be understood as the highest standard of spiritual knowledge. Then Lord Chaitanya asked Ramananda
Roy, “What is the highest standard of reputation?” Ramananda Roy immediately replied that if'a person is famous by a reputation of Krishna Consciousness,
he is to be called the most famous man in the world. In other words, if a man
is known as Krishna conscious, he is the greatest, most famous of men.
CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

Ma? Hii Zs

   

Conclusion

One who is famous as the man of Krishna Consciousness has eternal fame.
In the material world, everyone is after three things: he wants his name to
be perpetuated, he wants his fame to be broadcast all over the world, and he
wants some profit out of his material activities. But he does not know that
all this material name, fame, and profit belong to this temporary body; and,
as soon as the body is finished, all name, fame and profit are finished. Due to
ignorance, everyone is after name, fame and profit in connection with this
body. But to become very famous in connection with this body, or to become
known as a man of spiritually developed consciousness, without any knowledge
of the Supreme Spirit, Vishnu, must be deprecated. Real fame is if one attains
Krishna Consciousness in this very life.

According to Srimad Bhagwatam, there are twelve authorities. They are
famous because they were all great devotees of the Lord—Brahma, Narada,
Lord Shiva, Manu, Kapila, Prahlad, Janaka, Bhisma, Sukadeva Goswami, Bali,
Jamaraja and the Kumaras. All these great stalwarts are devotees of the Lord,
and therefore they are still remembered.

In the Garuda Purana there is a verse in which it is said that, instead of be
284
Conclusion 285

coming a demigod such as Brahma or Lord Shiva, if one becomes a famous
devotee of the Supreme Lord in this Age of Kali, that is very rare. Yudhisthira
also, in connection with talks between Narada and Pundarik, said, “After
many, many births, if somebody comes to understand that he is the servant
of Vasudeva, that person is the most famous, and can deliver all others. Similarly, in the Bhagavad Gita it said, “Anyone who understands that Vasudeva
is everything and surrenders to Him is the most learned and wise man.” In
the Agni Puranam it is said that liberation or transcendental life follows all the
devotees of Godhead. In the Vrihat Naradia Purana, it is also stated that even
personalities like Brahma and the other demigods do not know the value
of a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Garuda Purana
also it is stated that, out of many thousands of Brahmins, one is prominent
who is expert in performing sacrifices; and out of thousands of such Brahmins
who are expert in the performance of sacrifice, one Brahmin who is expert
in the Vedanta Sutra is the most famous; and out of many, many thousands of
Vedantists, one person who is a devotee of Lord Vishnu is the most famous.
There are many devotees of Vishnu, and out of them, one who is an unflinching devotee is eligible to enter into the Kingdom of God. In Srimad Bhagwatam,
Third Canto, 13th Chapter, it is also stated that there are many students of the
Vedas, but one who is always thinking of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
within his heart is the best. In the Narayan prayers it is said that even Brahma
if not a devotee of the Lord, He is therefore insignificant, whereas even a bacteria who is a devotee of the Lord is famous.

Lord Chaitanya at this point inquired from Ramananda Roy, “What
are the most valuable riches in this world?” Ramananda Roy replied that one
who has love for Radha Krishna has the most valuable jewel, the greatest
riches. One who is too much addicted to material sense gratification, or to
material wealth, has no such value. When one comes to the spiritual platform
in Krishna Consciousness he can understand that there are no more valuable
riches than love of Radha Krishna. In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Maharaj Dhruva
sought out the Supreme Lord because he wanted to get some land, but when
he saw Krishna he said, “I am so pleased that I don’t want anything.” In the
Bhagavad Gita it is also stated that if one takes shelter of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, or is elevated to the Supreme State of love of Godhead, then
there is nothing more to aspire to. Although such devotees can obtain anything
they desire from the Personality of Godhead, still, a pure devotee does not ask
anything from God.

When Lord Chaitanya asked Ramananda Roy what is the most painful
286 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

existence, Ramananda Roy replied that separation from a pure devotee
is the most painful existence in human society. In other words, where there
is no known devotee of the Lord, society becomes painful, and association
also becomes painful. In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Third Canto, 30th Chapter,
it is stated that if somebody tries to become happy simply in association with
society, friendship, and love—without Krishna Consciousness—he is in the
most distressed condition, bereft of the association of a pure devotee.

Lord Chaitanya then inquired from Sri Ramananda Roy: “Out of so
many so-called liberated souls, who is actually liberated?”

Ramananda replied that the person who is completely saturated with devotional love of Radha and Krishna is to be considered the best of all liberated
persons. In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Fifth Canto, it is stated that the association
of a pure devotee is more desirable than life itself, and in separation from the
association of the devotee, not even a second is passed happily. Similarly,
it is stated in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Sixth Canto, 14th Chapter: a devotee of
Narayan is so rare that you can find only one out of millions and millions.

Chaitanya Mahaprabhu inquired from Sri Ramananda Roy: “There are
many songs; which song do you think the best of all?”

Ramananda replied that any song which describes the Pastimes of Sri
Radha and Krishna is the best song. The conditioned soul is such that everyone
is captivated by sex life; all the material fiction—dramas and novels—are descriptions of love between a man and woman. As people have so much attraction for this literature, Krishna therefore appeared on this material world and
displayed His transcendental loving affairs with the Gopis, and there is an immense literature dealing with the transactions between the Gopis and Krishna.
Anyone who takes shelter of this story of Radha and Krishna enjoys actual
happiness. In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, 33rd Chapter, it is said
that the Lord, in order to show His actual life, displayed His Pastimes at Vrindaban; and any intelligent person who tries to understand the Pastimes of
Radha and Krishna is the most fortunate. And that sort of song and story is
the highest in the world.

Lord Chaitanya then inquired from Sri Ramananda Roy, “What is the
most profitable thing in this world, the essence of all auspicious events?”

Ramananda Roy replied that there is nothing so profitable as the association
of pure devotees.

Lord Chaitanya inquired: “What do you recommend a person think
of?” .

Ramananda Roy replied that one should always think of the Pastimes
of Krishna. This is Krishna Consciousness. Krishna has multiple activities,
Conclusion 287

and they are described in so many Vedic Scriptures. One should think of all
those Pastimes, always; that is the best meditation, and the highest ecstasy.

In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Second Canto, 2nd Chapter, it is confirmed
by Sukadeva Goswami that people should always think of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; not only think of Him—one should hear and chant
the Name, Fame, and Glories of the Supreme Lord.

Lord Chaitanya now inquired of Ramananda Roy: “What is the best type
of meditation?”

And Ramananda replied, “One who always meditates upon the Lotus
Feet of Radha and Krishna is the best meditator.”

Srimad Bhagwatam confirms this in the First Canto, 2nd Chapter, wherein
it is stated: “It is only the Supreme Personality of Godhead Who is the Master
of all devotees, Whose Name we should always be chanting, and Who should
be always thought of in meditation, and worshipped regularly.”

Lord Chaitanya inquired from Ramananda Roy, “Where should a person
live, giving up all other pleasures?”

And Ramananda Roy replied that one should give up all other pleasures
and should live in Vrindaban, the place where Lord Krishna had so many
Pastimes. In the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, 47th Chapter, it is said
by Uddhava that it is best to live at Vrindaban, even as one of the plants
or creepers of the land; where the Supreme Lord was, and where the
Gopis went, worshipping the Supreme Lord, the ultimate Goal of all
Vedic knowledge.

Chaitanya Mahaprabhu now asked, “What is the best subject to hear of?”

And Ramananda Roy replied, “The best subject matter to hear of is the
Pastimes of Radha and Krishna.” Actually, when the Pastimes of Radha and
Krishna are heard from the right source, one becomes at once a liberated soul.
But sometimes it happens that people do not hear the Pastimes of Radha and
Krishna from a person who is a realized soul. And they are therefore sometimes
misguided. It is stated in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Tenth Canto, 30th Chapter,
that one who hears about the Pastimes of Krishna with the Gopis will attain
to the highest platform of devotional service, and he will be freed from the
material lust which is overwhelming everyone's heart. In other words, the
actual result of hearing the Pastimes of Radha and Krishna is to get rid of all
material lust. If one does not become freed from material lust, then he should
not indulge in hearing the Pastimes of Radha and Krishna. Unless we hear
from the right source, the Pastimes of Radha and Krishna will be misrepresented, and we shall think that it is an ordinary affair between a man and
woman, and we shall be misguided.
288 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

Chaitanya Mahaprabhu next inquired from Ramananda Roy: “Who
is the most worshippable deity?”

And Ramananda Roy immediately replied that the transcendental couple,
Sri Radha and Krishna, is the ultimate Object of worship. There are different
kinds of worshippable objects, just as the impersonalists worship the impersonal Brahmajyoti. But the result of such worship is that one becomes bereft
of his living activities, and becomes just like the tree and other unmoving entities. Those who are worshippers of the Void also attain such a result. And
those who are Bhukti, who are after material enjoyment, worship demigods
and achieve the planets of the demigods, and in that body they enjoy
material happiness.

Lord Chaitanya inquired about those who are after material happiness,
and liberation from this material bondage. Where do they ultimately go?
Ramananda Roy replied that ultimately, some of them become as good as
the standing tree, and some of them achieve the heavenly planets to enjoy
material happiness.

Ramananda Roy went on to say that those who have no taste for Krishna
Consciousness or spiritual life are just like crows who take pleasure in eating
the bitter margosa fruit, while the poetic cuckoo eats the seeds of the mango.
Similarly, the unfortunate transcendentalists are simply speculating on dry
philosophy, whereas the transcendentalists who are in love with Radha Krishna
enjoy, just like the cuckoo. Therefore, those who are devotees of Radha and
Krishna are the most fortunate persons in the world. Ramananda Roy compared mental speculation with the bitter margosa fruit, which is not at all
edible; simply full of dry speculation, and so fit for the crowlike philosophers;
however, mango seeds are very relishable, and those who are in the devotional
service of Krishna and Radha are like those mango-tasting cuckoos.

Thus Ramananda Roy and Chaitanya Mahaprabhu talked together for the
whole night, sometimes dancing, sometimes singing, sometimes crying.
In this way the night was passed, and at dawn Ramananda Roy went to
his own place, and again in the evening he came back to see Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. The next day, after talking and discussing Krishna for some time,
Ramananda Roy fell at the feet of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and began to submit: “My dear Lord, You are so kind upon me that You have spoken to me
about the science of Krishna, about the science of Radharani and Their loving
affairs, and Their affairs of the Rasa Dance, and Their Pastimes—I never
thought that I should be able to speak on this subject matter. So have You
taught me, as You formerly taught Brahma the Vedas.”
Conclusion 289

This is the system of instruction from the Supersoul. Externally He is not
to be seen. Yet, internally, He speaks to the devotee, and that is confirmed in the
Bhagavad Gita: to anyone who 1s sincerely engaged in the service of the Lord,
the Lord from within dictates, and He acts in such a nice way that he ultimately
achieves the Supreme goal of life. When Brahma was born there was nobody
else to instruct him. Therefore, in the Vedic literature, we find that the Supreme
Lord Himself instructed Brahma about the Vedic knowledge through his
heart. The same thing is also confirmed in the Srimad Bhagwatam, Second Canto,
4th Chapter, by Sukadeva Goswami: the Gayatri Mantra was first of all instructed by the Supreme in the heart of Brahma. Similarly, Sukadeva Goswami
prayed to the Lord to also help him in speaking Srimad Bhagwatam before
Maharaj Parikshit.

The first verse of the First Canto of the Srimad Bhagwatam describes the
Supreme Absolute Truth, Who instructed Brahma through the heart. It is
stated there by Vyasadeva, the author of Srimad Bhagwatam: “Let me offer my
respectful obeisances to Sri Krishna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Who is the Cause of cosmic manifestation, its maintenance, and its dissolution.”
If we scrutinizingly try to understand the Supreme Truth, we can understand
that He knows everything directly and indirectly. He is the only Supreme
Personality fully independent, and it is He only, alone, Who instructed Brahma
as the Supersoul from within. Even the greatest learned scholar becomes
bewildered about understanding the Supreme Truth, because the whole perceivable cosmic manifestation is situated in Him. Although this material manifestation is a byproduct of fire, water, and earth, still it appears just like the
truth. But it is in Him only that the spiritual manifestation, the material manifestation, and the manifestation of the living entities—everything—tests.
Therefore He is the Supreme Truth.

Sri Ramananda Roy continued to speak to Lord Chaitanya: “Sir, first
of all I saw You as a Sannyasi, and again I saw You asa cowherd Boy. Further,
I see before You a golden doll. Due to the presence of that golden doll, Your
complexion has become gold, and yet I see Your complexion to be black,
as a cowherd boy. Will You kindly explain why I am seeing You with such
different complexions? Will You kindly explain to me without any reservation?”

Lord Chaitanya replied, “It is the nature of highly elevated devotees to
see Krishna in everything. Whenever they see anything, they do not see the
form of that particular thing, but they see Krishna.” This is confirmed in
Srimad Bhagwatam, Eleventh Canto, 2nd Chapter: that a person who is highly
290 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

elevated in devotional service sees the Supersoul, Krishna, Who is the Soul
of all individual souls. A similar passage is found in the Tenth Canto, 35th
Chapter, in which it is stated that all the creepers, plants and trees, full with
flowers and fruits, were bent over on account of the ecstasy of love for Krishna,
because Krishna was the Soul of their soul; and those trees and plants, after
Krishna manifested before them, were growing thorny.

Lord Chaitanya then continued to speak, addressing Ramananda: “You
have the highest conception of the Pastimes of Radha and Krishna, and you
are therefore seeing Radha Krishna everywhere.”

In reply to this Ramananda Roy said, “Sir, I may request that You don’t
try to hide Yourself. I understand that You have accepted the complexion
and mode of thinking of Srimati Radharani, so that You are trying to
understand Yourself from the viewpoint of Radharani; and You are advented
to take this point of view. Your incarnation is chiefly for understanding Your
Own Self, but, side by side, You are distributing love of Krishna to the world.
You have personally come here to deliver me. Now don't try to deceive me,
I request You, it is not good for You.”

Lord Chaitanya became very satisfied, and He smiled and showed Ramananda His real form. In other words, the Form which Lord Chaitanya manifested as the combination of Sri Radha and Krishna was first shown to Ramananda Roy. Lord Chaitanya was, therefore, Sri Krishna Himself, with the external features of the mode of Srimati Radharani. This transcendental ability
of one becoming two and two becoming one is possible, and was seen by Sri
Ramananda Roy. Persons who are fortunate enough to understand Lord
Chaitanya as well as the Pastimes at Vrindaban of Radha and Krishna can be
able, by the mercy of Sri Rupa Goswami, to know about the real identity
of Sri Krishna Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. |

Seeing this unique feature of Lord Chaitanya, Ramananda Roy fainted
and fell down flat on the floor. While he was unconscious, Lord Chaitanya
touched him, and he came to his senses. Ramananda Roy was surprised to
see Lord Chaitanya in His dress of a mendicant. Lord Chaitanya then embraced
him and pacified him and informed him that nobody had seen this Form
except himself. “You have understood the purpose of My incarnation, and
therefore you are privileged to see this particular feature of My Personality.”
Lord Chaitanya continued: “My dear Ramananda, I am not a different person
with fair complexion known as Gaura Purusa. I am the Selfsame Krishna—
Son of Maharaj Nanda, and due to contact with the body of Srimati Radharani
I have now assumed this Form. Srimati Radharani does not touch anyone
Conclusion 291

else but Krishna, and therefore Srimati Radharani has influenced Me with
Her complexion, mind and words, and I am just trying to understand the transcendental flavor of Krishna’s relationship.” No one should therefore eliminate
Lord Chaitanya from Sri Krishna.

The fact is that both Krishna and Lord Chaitanya are the Original Personality of Godhead. In His Form of Sri Krishna He is the Supreme Enjoyer,
in His Form of Lord Chaitanya He is the Supreme Enjoyed. No one can be
more superexcellently attractive than Sri Krishna, and except for Krishna no
one can be the Enjoyer of the Supreme Form of Devotion, Srimati Radharani. Except Sri Krishna, all other Vishnu Forms are lacking this quality.

This is explained in the Govinda description of Chaitanya Charitamrita,
where it is said that Srimati Radharani is the only personality who can infuse
Sri Krishna’ with transcendental pleasure. Therefore, Srimati Radharani is the
chief of all the damsels of Vraja who love Govinda, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Sri Krishna.

“Please take it from Me that I have nothing to hide from you. And even
if I do try to hide from you, you are such an advanced devotee that you can
understand everything of My secret. I request that you plese keep this secret,
and do not disclose it to anyone. It would be considered that I am a madman.
The facts which are disclosed to you cannot be understood by any materialistic
person. When they hear all this description they will laugh at Me. You can
understand yourself, and keep it for yourself. As a devotee becomes mad in his
ecstasy of love for Krishna, so from the materialistic point of view, both yourself and Myself are the same as madmen. Therefore, don’t disclose these facts
to the ordinary men, or they will laugh at Me.”

Lord Chaitanya then passed ten nights with Ramananda Roy, and enjoyed
his company in discussing the Pastimes of Krishna and Radha. The discussion
between Sri Chaitanya and Sri Ramananda Roy was on the highest level
of love of Krishna. Some of the talks are described, but most of them could
not be described. This has been analyzed in the Chaitanya Charitamrita as an
examination in metallurgy. The comparison is that the discussion proceeds just
like metals being studied: first copper, then bronze, then silver, gold, and at
last touchstone. The preliminary discussions between Lord Chaitanya and
Ramananda Roy are considered copper, and a higher discussion is considered
gold. But the fifth dimension of the discussion between Ramananda Roy
and Lord Chaitanya is considered to be touchstone. If, however, one is very
eager to progress higher and higher to the position of the highest metallurgist,
292 Teachings of Lord Chaitanya

then he can understand—beginning with inquiring into the difference between
copper and bronze, and then silver, and so on.

The next day, Lord Chaitanya asked Ramananda Roy to allow Him to
go back to Jagannath Puri, “So that the rest of Our lives We can remain together at Jagannath Puri, and We can pass Our time in discussing Krishna.”
Lord Chaitanya thus embraced Ramananda Roy and sent him to his own
place. In the morning He started His further journey. Ramananda Roy and Lord
Chaitanya met on the river bank where there was a deity, a temple of Hanuman. After seeing the temple of Hanuman He left that place. So long as Chaitanya Mahaprabhu remained at Kavur, all kinds of people met Him, and by
His Grace everyone became a devotee of the Supreme Lord.

After the departure of Lord Chaitanya, Ramananda Roy became overwhelmed by separation from the Lord, and he decided to retire from service
just to meet the Lord again at Jagannath Puri. This discussion of Ramananda
Roy with Lord Chaitanya is the most concentrated form of devotional service,
and by hearing the discussion of Ramananda Roy and Lord Chaitanya one
can understand the Pastimes of Sri Radha and Krishna. One can also understand
the confidential part played by Lord Chaitanya. If one is fortunate enough,
he can place his faith in this discussion, and can enter into the transcendental
association of Radha and Krishna.
THE BHAGAVAD GITA AS IT IS

A New Translation with Commentary by
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami

With appreciations by
Allen Ginsberg, Denise Levertov,
and Thomas Merton

PUBLISHED BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

The Bhagavad Gita As It 1s is a major new translation of,
and commentary upon, The Bhagavad Gita. Prepared
by one of the most distinguished teachers of Vedic religion and thought, it offers illuminating new perspectives
on one of the world’s great spiritual texts.

‘There are many commentaries on The Bhagavad Gita,
and the necessity for another should be explained on the
following basis: An American lady asked me to recommend an English edition of The Bhagavad Gita which
she could read. I was unable to do so in good conscience.
Of course, there are many translations, but of those I have
seen—not only in America, but also in India—none can
be said to be authoritative, because in almost every one
of them the author has expressed his personal opinion
through the commentaries, without touching the spirit
of The Bhagavad Gita as it is.”

—from the Introduction by
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami

“This translation and the commentary which accompanies it has as its purpose the determination to direct
the reader to Krishna, rather than away from Him. In
this, A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami’s work is unique among
all the translations and commentaries available in this
language. Unique also is the fact that The Bhagavad Gita
is thus made wholly consistent and comprehensible.
Krishna being the Speaker of The Gita, and It’s ultimate
goal as well, this is necessarily the only translation that
can present this great scripture in its true terms.”

—from the Preface by
Rayarama Das Brahmachary

318 pages MACMILLAN hardcover edition: $6.95
COLLIER softcover edition: $2.95
At your bookstore or available from
ISKCON

A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami is the founder of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness, which
now has centers in every major city in the United States,
Canada, England and Germany.

 
ONE OF THE MOST SUBLIME
LYRICAL ACHIEVEMENTS
IN ALL MYSTIC LITERATURE

In°Praise of . A.C.°Bhaktivedanta Swami:

“A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swamibrings to the West a salutary reminder that our highly activistic
and one-sided culture lacks the inner depth of Krishna Consciousness. Without such depth
our moral and political protestations are just so much verbiage.”

Chena: » Leston

“He writes from not only a scholar’s but a practitioner’s, a dedicated life-long devotee’s, point of view that is honest and very

moving.”
f
ae be tve

“The HARE KRISHNA meditation led by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
transports the disciples intoa state of religious ecstasy so rapturous

it’s almost embarrassing to witness.”
od f oa
per ne ee Ten rel plenuthe

“The task he has undertaken in translating and commenting on the Bhagavata Purana, Bhagavad Gita, and Chaitanya Charitamrita necessitates a considerable erudition. His teachings are obviously significant to many of our young people and is therefore important to
all of us.”

professor Coodward te Svirmock

uniwersily of chicago

“He is doing valuable work and his books are significant contributions to the salvation of human kind.”

3, pleveil Bahadur Sa hyerstri

late prime minister of india.

‘Tam greatly impressed by the recent surge of interest in Krishna
Consciousness. A.C. BhaktivedantaSwami is due our respects and
good wishes.”

—>
professor is Cas carripbell
saraly lawrence college
“The purports or explanations of A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swamiaretransparent and exquisitely
detailed expositions presented here for the first time to common public Western mind—a

storehouse of old age, experience, devotion, learning, scholarship, Hindu granny wisdom
sincerity, gaiety and sweet transcendental insight.”

Allien Govinske ty:

 
