TEACHINGS OF
IORD KAPILA

The Son
of Veyahat

N \ Wy

iy * oa
y > +e $<
ao

MSD Rane Grave * Ke
AC, Bhaktivedanta Swain Pebhupsd

r FOUNDER ACARYA-OF THE INTERNATIONA SOCIEPY"EOR £

 

mele
7 yes

 

TEACHINGS OF —
LORD KAPILA

WHEREAS philosophy in the West germinates, most
often, in the soil of intellectual curiosity and is highly
theoretical, being concerned with “knowledge for its
own sake,” philosophy in the ancient Vedic tradition
of India is very pointedly directed toward the avowedly
practical goal of human liberation. The conviction that
human life is specifically meant for discovering and applying the proper means for the liberation of the self
from matter is the sine qua non of India’s traditional
spiritual thought and culture.

This book is based on a unique series of lectures on
the teachings of Kapila Muni (Kapiladeva), presented
in Bombay, India, in the spring of 1974, by His Divine
Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada. Kapila
Muni, a renowned sage of antiquity, is the author of
the Sankhya philosophical system. Sankhya, which
forms an important part of India’s ancient philosophical heritage, is both a system of metaphysics and a
system of spiritual knowledge culminating in liberation. Kapila, however, is not an ordinary philosopher
or sage. According to Vedic tradition, He is an avatara
(incarnation) of the Supreme Absolute Truth, Lord Sri
Krsna.

Lord Kapila descended as the son of Kardama
Muni and his wife, Devahati, both of whom were great
yogis and saints. After Kardama Muni renounced the
world and went to the forest to attain spiritual perfection, Devahati, aware of the divinity of her son, approached Kapila and implored Him to endow her with
spiritual enlightenment. Pleased by His mother’s sincere desire for transcendental knowledge, Kapila spoke
Sinkhya philosophy, the philosophy which leads one
to discriminate between matter and spirit and which
culminates in the ultimate liberation called bhakti,
divine love.

In this book, the author gives a brilliant exposition
on the basic teachings of Kapila and thus illuminates a
major element in traditional Indian spirituality. Topics
discussed include the significance of the guru, the psychology of consciousness, the characteristics of a selfrealized person, the science of meditation, the nature
of transcendental knowledge, and the process of ultimate liberation.

Through his voluminous writings, which constitute a veritable library of Vedic philosophy, religion,
literature and culture, Srila Prabhupada has distinguished himself as the greatest contemporary
teacher of Vedic philosophy and religion. This volume
represents another valuable contribution by Srila
Prabhupada to our increasing understanding of the
profound and universal principles of Vedic wisdom.
EACHINGS OF

IORD KAPILA
The Son of Devahtt

His Divine Grace

AC. Bhaktivedanta Swami Rrabhupada

FOUNDER- ACARYA OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY FOR KRISHNA CONSCIOUSNESS

THE BHAKTIVEDANTA BOOK TRUST
New York @ Los Angeles ® London @® Bombay
BOOKS by
His Divine Grace

A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada

Bhagavad-gita As It Is

Srimad-Bhagavatam, Cantos 1-10 (50 Vols.)

Sri Caitanya-caritamrta (17 Vols.)

Teachings of Lord Caitanya

The Nectar of Devotion

The Nectar of Instruction

Sri ISopanisad

Easy Journey to Other Planets

Krsna Consciousness: The Topmost Yoga System
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead (3 Vols.)
Perfect Questions, Perfect Answers

Dialectical Spiritualism— A Vedic View of Western Philosophy
Teachings of Lord Kapila, the Son of Devahiti
Transcendental Teachings of Prahlad Maharaja
Krsna, the Reservoir of Pleasure

Life Comes from Life

The Perfection of Yoga

Beyond Birth and Death

On the Way to Krsna

Geetar-gan (Bengali)

Raja-vidyd: The King of Knowledge

Elevation to Krsna Consciousness

Krsna Consciousness: The Matchless Gift

Back to Godhead Magazine (Founder)

A complete catalog is available upon request.

Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
3764 Watseka Avenue
Los Angeles, California 90034
TEACHINGS OF
LORD KAPILA
The Son of Devahiti
i
,

Readers interested in the subject matter of this book
are invited by the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
to correspond with its Secretary.

International Society for Krishna Consciousness

3764 Watseka Avenue
Los Angeles, California 90034

First Printing, 1977: 50,000 copies

© 1977 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
All Rights Reserved
Printed in the United States of America

 

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Puranas. Bhagavatapurdna. English. Selections.
Teachings of Lord Kapiladeva.

Bibliography: p.

Includes index.

I. Bhaktivedanta Swami, A. C., 1986II. Title.
BL1135.P7A22 1977 294.5925 7177-11077
ISBN 0-89213-008-3
Foreword

Kapila Muni, a renowned sage of antiquity, is the author of the philosophical system known as Sankhya, which forms an important part of
India’s ancient philosophical heritage. Sinkhya is both a system of
metaphysics, dealing with the elemental principles of the physical universe, and a system of spiritual knowledge, with its own methodology,
culminating in full consciousness of the Supreme Absolute. Kapila,
however, is not an ordinary philosopher or sage. According to Vedic tradition, the tradition of India’s ancient scriptural literature, He Himself is
an avatdra (incarnation) of the Supreme Absolute Truth.

Kapila’s teachings are originally inscribed in the Srimad-Bhagavatam,
or Bhaégavata Purana, one of the most important scriptural documents of
Vedic theism. Within the Bhagavatam, Kapila’s teachings comprise
Chapters Twenty-five through Thirty-three of the Third Canto. This
book, Teachings of Lord Kapila, the Son of Devahiti, is based on a
unique series of lectures presented in Bombay, India, in the spring of
1974, by His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada. In
this series, Srila Prabhupada spoke from the Twenty-fifth Chapter,
which contains the beginning of Lord Kapila’s teachings. Srila Prabhupada is the author of a celebrated multivolume translation and commentary on the entire text of the Bhadgavatam, and at the time of the Kapila
lectures he had already completed his written commentary on the section
of the Bhagavatam dealing with Kapiladeva’s teachings. In these special
lectures, however, Srila Prabhupada went into significantly greater detail
in elucidating the verses and shed an even broader light upon these
fascinating teachings.

The text begins with the words of Saunaka, the foremost of the sages
of Naimisaranya, the vastly learned sages to whom Srimad-Bhagavatam
was originally spoken some thousands of years ago. The sages have
already heard about Lord Kapiladeva from Sita Gosvami, an exalted
spiritual master, and it is clear from Saunaka’s words that they accept
Kapila Muni as being an incarnation of the Lord Himself and as therefore
being the highest authority on yoga and transcendental knowledge. In
recounting the history of Lord Kapila, Sita Gosvami, in accordance with
Vedic principles for presenting spiritual knowledge, refers to discourse
Contents

Foreword vii

1 / The Purpose of Lord Kapila’s Advent 1

2 / The Transcendental Master and Supreme Yogi 13

3 / How to Understand the Lord’s Activities 21

4/ Approaching a Bona Fide Guru 31

9 / Lord Kapila Takes Charge of His Mother, Devahiti 41

6 / Devahiti Desires Transcendental Knowledge 51

7 / Lord Kapila Begins to Explain Self-realization 77

8 / Bhakti-yoga: The Supreme Yoga System 93

9 / Purifying the Mind for Self-realization 105
10 / Spiritual Attachment and Material Detachment 119
11 / The Symptoms of a Sadhu 135
12/ Associating With the Supreme Lord Through Hearing 157
13 / Perfect Knowledge Through Surrender 171
14/ Bhakti As Ultimate Liberation 189
15 / Meditation on the Lord’s Transcendental Forms 205
16 / The Pure Devotees’ Spiritual Opulences 221
17 / Taking Shelter of Krsna, the Supreme Controller 237
18 / Devotional Service: The Final Perfection 249

Appendixes
The Author 259
References 263
Glossary 265
Guide to Sanskrit Pronunciation 27]
Index to Sanskrit Verses 273
General Index 277
viii Teachings of Lord Kapila

by great spiritual masters who have previously discussed this same subject. In this case, Sita Gosvami refers to a discussion between Vidura and
the great sage Maitreya, who was a friend of Vydasadeva, the original
compiler of the Vedic literature.

As Sita Gosvami has already described, Lord Kapila appeared in this
world as the son of Kardama Muni, a master of mystic yoga, and his wife,
Devahiti. Both Kardama Muni and Devahiti were aware of the divinity
of their son. Indeed, even before Kapila’s birth, Lord Brahma himself,
the chief created person in this universe, had appeared before Devahiti
and revealed to her that her son was to be an incarnation of the Supreme
Lord and that this incarnation would enlighten her with spiritual
knowledge.

According to the Vedic social system, a man with a grown son may accept the order of sannydsa, thus renouncing all connections with his
family and worldly life, and entrust his wife to the care of his son. Kardama Muni, of course, knew that his son was an incarnation of the
Supreme Lord, yet to honor this Vedic system and emphasize its importance, he too eventually accepted sannydsa, entrusting his wife,
Devahiti, to the care of his divine son, Kapiladeva. Therefore, as Sita
Gosvami begins to answer Saunaka’s request to hear further about Lord
Kapiladeva, the sages have already been informed of how Kardama Muni
departed for the forest, leaving Kapiladeva behind with Devahiti.

After Kardama Muni’s departure, Devahiti, remembering the
prophetic words of Lord Brahma, approaches her divine son and humbly
expresses her desire for spiritual enlightenment: “‘My Lord, I have fallen
into the abyss of ignorance. Your Lordship is my only means of getting
out of this darkest region of ignorance because You are my transcendental eye, which, by Your mercy only, I have attained after many, many
births. .. . Now be pleased, my Lord, to dispel my great delusion ... You
are the ax which can cut the tree of material existence. I therefore offer
my obeisances to You, who are the greatest of all transcendentalists, and I
inquire from You as to the relationship between man and woman and between spirit and matter.” (Srimad-Bhdgavatam 3.25.7-11) Pleased by
His mother’s pure desire for spiritual enlightenment, and feeling great
compassion for her, Kapila begins to speak on the Sankhya philosophy.

Now, what is Sankhya? Insofar as Sinkhya deals with the elemental
categories or principles of the physical universe, Sankhya is what
Foreword ix

Western scholars generally refer to as ““metaphysics.” The term sdrikhya
literally means “to count.” This name is used because Sankhya philosophy enumerates principles of cosmic evolution by rational analysis. The
etymological meaning of the word sarikhya is “that which explains very
lucidly by analysis of material elements.” Philosophically, this term is
used because the Sankhya system expounds analytical knowledge that
enables one to distinguish between matter and spirit. This understanding
culminates in bhakti, devotion for and service to the Supreme. It may be ©
said, therefore, that Sankhya and bhakti form two aspects of the same
process, bhakti being the ultimate goal or ultimate aspect of Sankhya.

It is interesting to note, at this point, that long after Lord Kapila’s descent, an imitation Kapila appeared on the Indian subcontinent and propounded a nontheistic Sankhya. That which is generally studied as
Sankhya in the contemporary academic context is actually this later, nontheistic, materialistic Sinkhya. The Sankhya philosophy, propounded by
the original Kapila, is practically unknown in the West. Teachings of
Lord Kapila, the Son of Devahiti (along with Srila Prabhupada’s complete commentary on Kapila’s Sankhya in his edition of SrimadBhagavatam) is probably the first major exposition in the English
language on the original, theistic Sankhya. It should therefore be of considerable interest to scholars in this field.

Because the basic principle and the ultimate goal of Lord Kapiladeva’s
Sankhya philosophy is bhakti, this is the subject with which Lord
Kapiladeva begins His instructions to Devahati. Consequently, because
this volume, Teachings of Lord Kapila, the Son of Devahiti, is Srila
Prabhupada’s commentary on the beginning of Lord Kapila’s teachings,
it is chiefly concerned with the science of bhakti-yoga—the process of
linking with God (yoga means “linking”’) through bhakti (devotion).

As the actual history begins, Devahiti approaches her son, Kapila, and
with deep humility expresses her sincere desire for spiritual enlightenment. In response, Lord Kapila delineates “‘the path of the transcendentalists, who are interested in self-realization.” Concisely summarizing
the actual process of self-realization, Kapila defines consciousness in both
the conditioned and liberated states. He describes the psychology of pure
consciousness, delineates the symptoms and characteristics of a sddhu,
holy person, and stresses the importance of sddhu-sariga, association
with those who are saintly. Kapiladeva then explains that liberation is
 

he - TNS RS RL NT A TT EE NN TTT A TA TET TT TTS EET ATT TT ETE ST
SS I A SS et ;
array oe re a .
4

x Teachings of Lord Kapila

merely a stage preliminary to the attainment of bhakti and that one who
attains bhakti automatically achieves liberation. One who engages in
bhakti, devotional yoga, automatically transcends material desires and
ultimately crosses beyond birth and death.

According to later descriptions in Srimad-Bhagavatam, Devahiti
ultimately attains full enlightenment in transcendental knowledge by
hearing and understanding the sublime philosophical teachings of her
great son.

—The Publishers
ee é
* a | Reet ag:
®. ——_ .
sain *' @@@e8 ese
" pa
&
&

%
oh
i
e | memaqnceees “oe
é ‘

. «

His Divine Grace
_ A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
Founder-Acarya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness

 
PLATE ONE

Some hundreds of thousands of years ago Lord Krsna appeared as
Kapiladeva, the son of Devahiti and Kardama Muni. After Kapiladeva
prew up, His father, according to the Vedic system, retired and left home
to cultivate spiritual life. At that time Devahtti approached Lord
Kapiladeva and said, *““My dear Kapila, I am very sick of the disturbance
of my material senses, for because of this sense disturbance, my Lord, I
have fallen into the abyss of ignorance. You have come as my son, but
You are my guru because You can inform me how | can cross the ocean of
nescience, which is the material world. Your Lordship is my only means
of getting out of this darkest region of ignorance because You are my
transcendental eye, which, by Your mercy only, | have attained after
many, many births. You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
origin and Supreme Lord of all living entities. You have arisen to disseminate the rays of the sun in order to dissipate the darkness of ignorance of the universe.” After hearing of His mother’s uncontaminated
desire for transcendental realization, the Lord thanked her within Himself for her questions, and thus, His face smiling, He explained the path
of sdrikhya-yoga for the transcendentalists, who are interested in selfrealization. Throughout the ages, Kapiladeva’s Sankhya philosophy has
stood the test of time, and today anyone can learn the facts about material
nature, the soul, and the Supersoul by studying His teachings. (p. 58,
p. 77)
SS ew

 
PLATE TWO

Lord Krsna resides in His own abode, Goloka Vrndavana, in the spiritual world. But it is not that Krsna is simply in Goloka Vrndavana and
nowhere else. Actually, He is everywhere; He is even within the atom as
the Paramatma, or Supersoul. The Supersoul has four hands, carrying a
lotus, a wheel of a chariot, a conchshell and a club respectively. His
mouth expresses His happiness, His eyes are spread like lotus petals, and
His garments, bedecked with valuable jewels, are yellowish like the
saffron of the kadamba flower. His ornaments are all made of gold, set
with jewels, and He wears a glowing headdress and earrings. On His
chest He wears the Kaustubha jewel engraved with a beautiful calf, on
His shoulders He wears other jewels, and around His neck He wears a
garland of fresh flowers. About His waist He wears an ornamental
wreath; on His fingers, rings studded with valuable jewels. His leglets,
His bangles, His oiled hair curled with bluish tint, and His beautiful
smiling face are all very pleasing. (p. 34)
 
PLATE THREE

Lord Krsna is never alone in Goloka Vrndavana, His personal, spiritual abode. Like a king with his retinue, He is always enjoying happiness
in the company of His associates— especially His cowherd boyfriends and
girl friends (gopis), His mother and His father. When Krsna enters the
forest with His elder brother, Balaréma, one gopi will say to another,
“My dear friend, those eyes that see the beautiful faces of Krsna and
Balarama are certainly fortunate. As these two sons of King Nanda enter
the forest, surrounded by Their friends and driving the cows before
Them, They glance lovingly upon the residents of Vrndavana. For those

who have eyes, we think there is no greater object of vision.” (p. 84,
p. 168)
 
PLATE FOUR

In the supreme spiritual abode of Goloka Vrndavana, Lord Krsna
plays on His flute and is accompanied by His personified pleasure potency, Srimati Radharani. Krsna is very fond of Radharani because She
renders Him the best service. Once Srimati Radhdarani revealed Her mind
to one of Her gopi friends: “‘My dear friend, Krsna is My life and soul.
Krsna is the treasure of My life. Indeed, Krsna is the very life of My life.
I therefore keep Him always in My heart and try to please Him by
rendering service. That is My constant meditation.” (pp. 53-54,
pp. 218-19)
 
PLATE FIVE

Because our eyes and other senses are imperfect, we cannot see Lord
Krsna present everywhere in His original, spiritual form. But since
Krsna is omnipotent, out of His mercy He agrees to appear before us in a
stone form called the arcd-vigraha, the Deity. Atheists think that the
Deity is merely an idol, but devotees know that the Deity is Krsna Himself. As seen here, Deity worship in Vedic times was very opulent. The
highly elevated braéhmanas would perform the bathing ceremony for the
Deities of Sri Sri Radha-Krsna with all paraphernalia, and then they
would dress the Deities with fine clothing, ornaments, fragrant flower
garlands and other paraphernalia for worship. Finally, with attention and
devotion, a brdhmana would formally worship the Deities as the
assembled devotees sang songs glorifying the Lord and played musical
instruments such as shenais, kettledrums and vinds. (p. 163)
 
PLATE SIX

In the beginning of creation, the Supreme Personality of Godhead expands Himself in the form of the purusa incarnation Maha-Visnu. Lying
in the Causal Ocean, Maha-Visnu impregnates the living entities into
material nature by glancing over His unmanifest material energy (shown
here as the goddess Durga). The word durgd means “‘prison,” and it is
goddess Durga’s function to see that all sinful souls are kept within the
prison of this material world. For this purpose, Lord Krsna has given
Durga so much power that she can create, maintain and annihilate the
cosmos. However, she cannot act independently of Krsna, for she is like

His shadow. (p. 154)
 
PLATE SEVEN

Long ago, in the age of truth (Satya-yuga), Lord Krsna appeared as
Kapiladeva to teach the eightfold mystic yoga process for self-realization.
But this process is much too difficult for the fallen souls of this age of
quarrel (Kali-yuga). So, just to give relief to the rotting, conditioned
souls of this Kali-yuga, Lord Krsna appeared five hundred years ago in
His most merciful incarnation of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Lord
Caitanya taught the yoga process just suitable for this age of Kali—the
process of sarkirtana, the congregational chanting of the Hare Krsna
mantra. Here we see Lord Caitanya instructing His intimate disciples
about the glories of sankirtana: “Let there be all victory for the chanting
of the holy name of Lord Krsna, which can cleanse the mirror of the
heart and stop the miseries of the blazing fire of material existence. The
chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra is the waxing moon that spreads the
white lotus of good fortune for all living entities. It is the life and soul of
all education and expands the blissful ocean of transcendental life. It
gives a cooling effect to everyone and enables everyone to taste full nectar at every step.” (p. 97)
 
 

 

PLATE EIGHT

The first step in all yoga systems, whether taught by Lord Kapila in the SrimadBhaégavatam or by Lord Krsna in the Bhagavad-gitd, is to understand the distinction between the eternal spirit soul and the changing material body. In this diorama (part of the
newly opened First American Theistic Exhibit, in Los Angeles) we see a graphic presentation of Lord Krsna’s first instruction in the Bhagavad-gitd (2.13): ‘As the embodied soul
continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age, the soul similarly passes
into another body at death.” Because we are conditioned by material nature, we are seeing
only the changing body, but this is not our proper identity. When we can understand that
we are not the body, that is the beginning of self-realization. (p. 112)
 
PLATE NINE

For material creation, Lord Krsna’s plenary expansion assumes the
form of Maha-Visnu, who lies down in the Causal Ocean. While MahaVisnu sleeps in that ocean, millions of universes are generated as He exhales and annihilated when He inhales. To create diversities in each of
these universes, Mahad-Visnu expands Himself as Garbhodakasayi Visnu.
Garbhodakasayi Visnu lies on the bed of the thousand-headed serpent
Ananta Sesa-naga and is always served by the goddess of fortune,
Laksmi. From the navel of Garbhodakasdyi Visnu grows a lotus flower,
which is the birthplace of Brahma, who is the supreme creature and
_ manager of each universe. (p. 224)
 
PLATE TEN

In the conditioned state the living entities are just like puppets in the
hands of the three modes of material nature (goodness, passion and ignorance), which are in turn controlled by Lord Krsna. But the conditioned souls have forgotten their helplessness, as Lord Krsna explains in
the Bhagavad-gita (3.27): “‘The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material nature, thinks himself to be the
doer of activities that are in actuality carried out by nature.’’ The goal of
the yoga system taught by Kapiladeva to His mother is to transcend the
influence of the modes of nature and to come to that state by which one is
directly influenced by Lord Krsna Himself. As Kapiladeva explains,
‘“The stage in which the consciousness of the living entity is attracted by
the three modes of material nature is called conditional life. But when
that same consciousness is attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is situated in the consciousness of liberation.”’ (p. 89)
 
PLATE ELEVEN

Arjuna was a Vaisnava—a devotee of Lord Krsna—and because a
Vaisnava’s natural instinct is not to do harm to anyone, in the beginning
Arjuna was unwilling to fight in the Battle of Kuruksetra. However,
when a Vaisnava knows that Krsna wants a particular thing done, he
does not care for his own considerations. So after Krsna had spoken the
Bhagavad-gitd, Arjuna went forth into battle. The military strength of
the Kauravas was invincible like an insurmountable ocean, but because
of Krsna’s friendship, Arjuna, seated on the chariot, was able to cross
over it. Great generals like Bhisma, Drona, Karna, Jayadratha and
Bahlika all directed their invincible weapons against Arjuna, but by Lord
Krsna’s grace they could not touch even a hair of his head. (p. 151)
 
CHAPTER ONE

The Purpose
of Lord Kapila’s Advent

TEXT 1

Saunaka uvdca
kapilas tattva-sankhydata
bhagavan atma-mayaya
jatah svayam ajah séksad
atma-prajnaptaye nrnam

TRANSLATION

Sri Saunaka said: Although He is unborn, the Supreme Personality of Godhead took birth as Kapila Muni by His internal
potency. He descended to disseminate transcendental knowledge
for the benefit of the whole human race.

PURPORT

The word dtma-prajfiaptaye indicates that the Lord descends for the
benefit of the human race to give transcendental knowledge. Material
necessities are quite sufficiently provided for in the knowledge given in
the Vedic literatures, which offer a program for good living and gradual
elevation to the platform of sattva-guna, the mode of goodness. Once one
is situated in sattva-guna, one’s knowledge expands. On the platform of
passion there is no knowledge, for passion is an impetus to enjoy material
benefits. On the platform of ignorance there is neither knowledge nor
enjoyment but simply animalistic living.

The Vedas are intended to elevate one from the mode of ignorance to
the platform of goodness. When one is situated in the mode of goodness,
he is able to understand knowledge of the self, or transcendental
knowledge. Such knowledge cannot be appreciated by any ordinary man;

l
2 Teachings of Lord Kapila

therefore a disciplic succession is required. This knowledge is expounded
either by the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself or by His bona
fide devotee. Saunaka Muni also states here that Kapila, the incarnation
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, took birth or appeared simply to
disseminate transcendental knowledge. To understand that one is not
matter but spirit soul (aham brahmaésmi: “I am by nature Brahman’’) is
not sufficient for understanding the self and his activities. One must be
situated in the activities of Brahman. Knowledge of those activities is explained by the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. Such transcendental knowledge can be appreciated in human society but not in animal
society, as clearly indicated here by the word nrnam, “for the human
beings.’ Human beings are meant to lead a regulated life. By nature,
there is regulation in animal life also, but that is not like the regulative
life described in the scriptures or by the Vedic authorities. Only when
one’s life is regulated according to the Vedas can one understand
transcendental knowledge.

For the propagation of this transcendental knowledge, Kapiladeva, the
incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, gave instructions in
Sankhya philosophy to His mother, Devahiti. Later, another Kapiladeva
appeared who expounded atheistic Sankhya philosophy, which dealt with
the twenty-four elements but gave no information about God. The original Kapila is called the Devahiti-putra Kapila, and the other is called the
atheist Kapila. Concerning Kapiladeva, Saunaka Rsi says, kapilas tattvasankhyatd. Kapila is the Supreme Person; therefore He can explain the
Absolute Truth. Actually only Bhagavan can know the true position of
the ultimate truth. No one else can know it. Bhagavan, Krsna or His incarnation, occasionally visits the earth to give humanity information
about the aim of life. Thus the Supreme Lord descended as Kapiladeva,
tativa-sankhydta. The word sarikhydatd means “‘expounder,”’ and tattva
means “the Absolute Truth.”’ The Absolute Truth is Bhagavan Sri Krsna
Himself. We cannot understand the Absolute Truth or the Supreme Person by mental speculation, especially when we are under the influence
of the three modes of material nature (sattva-guna, rajo-guna and
tamo-guna). Only those who are situated in sattva-guna (the mode of
goodness) are fit to understand the Absolute Truth. According to
Bhagavad-gita (18.42), those possessing brahminical qualifications are
situated in sattva-guna.
The Purpose of Lord Kapila’s Advent 3

Samo damas tapah saucam
ksantir Grjavam eva ca

Jidnam vijfidnam astikyam
brahma-karma svabhdvajam

‘‘Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty, wisdom, knowledge and righteousness—these are the qualities by which the
bradhmanas work.”

According to the Vedic conception, there must be men in society who
are factually brahmanas, capable of expounding the real truth. If everyone becomes a Sudra, the Absolute Truth cannot be understood. It is said
that at the present moment in Kali-yuga everyone is a Sidra (kalau
§adra-sambhavah), and it is very difficult in this age to find qualified
bradhmanas, for they are very rare. There is practically not a single
qualified bradhmana in this age.

prayendlpdyusah sabhya
kaldv asmin yuge janah
mandéh sumanda-matayo

manda-bhagya hy upadrutah

‘‘O learned one, in this iron age of Kali men have but short lives. They
are quarrelsome, lazy, misguided, unlucky and, above all, always disturbed.”’ (Bhdg. 1.1.10) The people in this age are very short-lived and
slow in understanding spiritual life. Actually human life is meant for understanding spiritual values, but because everyone in this age is a Sidra,
no one is interested. People have forgotten life’s real purpose. The word
manda means both slow and bad, and everyone in this age is either bad
or slow or a combination of both. People are unfortunate and disturbed
by so many things. According to Srimad-Bhagavatam there will eventually be no rain and consequently a scarcity of food. The governments
will also levy very heavy taxes. The characteristics of this age predicted
by Srimad-Bhagavatam are already being experienced to some degree.
Since Kali-yuga is a very miserable age, Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is
Sri Krsna Himself, advises everyone simply to chant Hare Krsna.

harer nama harer ndma
harer ndmaiva kevalam
4 Teachings of Lord Kapila

kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha

‘In this age of Kali there is no alternative, there is no alternative, there
is no alternative for spiritual progress than the holy name, the holy name,
the holy name of the Lord.” (Brhan-ndradiya Purdna) This process is
not Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s invention, but is advised by the Sdstras, the
Puranas. The process for this Kali-yuga is very simple. One need only
chant the Hare Krsna mahd-mantra. Since everyone in this age is an
unintelligent, unfortunate and disturbed sidra, how can anyone understand the Absolute Truth or the aim of life? As stated by the Lord
Himself in Bhagavad-gita (4.7):

yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata

abhyutthanam adharmasya
taddtmanam srjamy aham

“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time |
descend Myself.”

Some hundreds and thousands of years ago Lord Krsna appeared as
Devahiti-putra Kapiladeva. His father’s name was Kardama Muni. After
Kapiladeva grew up, His father, according to the Vedic system, retired,
took sannydsa and left home to cultivate spiritual life. It is not that one
should rot in this material world throughout one’s whole life.
PaficadSordhvam vanam vrajet. According to the Vedic injunctions, there
are four dsramas and four varnas, and these used to be followed very
strictly. After his son grew up, Kardama Muni, being a strict follower of
the Vedas, left home and put his wife in the charge of his grown son,
Kapiladeva.

It is said of Kapiladeva: kapilas tattva-sankhydta bhagavan. Lord
Kapila is Bhagavan. Nowadays Bhagavan is taken very cheaply because
the word is misused, but actually Bhagavan is not an ordinary man.
Avajénanti marh midhah: because Bhagavan Sri Krsna appeared as a
human being, fools and rascals (midhas) consider Krsna an -ordinary

human. As Krsna Himself states in Bhagavad-gita (7.13):
The Purpose of Lord Kapila’s Advent o

tribhir gunamayair bhavair
ebhih sarvam idam jagat
mohitam nabhyanati
mam ebhyah param avyayam

““Deluded by the three modes (goodness, passion and ignorance), the whole
world does not know Me, who am above the modes and inexhaustible.”

Yet there are mahdtmds, great souls, who can understand Krsna.
Arjuna could understand that although Krsna was playing the part of his
friend, He was nonetheless the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Arjuna
was in perfect knowledge, yet Krsna instructed him for our benefit.
Arjuna requested Krsna’s instructions, which are set forth for all human
society. After hearing Bhagavad-gitd, Arjuna addressed Krsna as param
brahma param dhdma, “the Supreme Brahman and supreme abode.”’

Every person is actually Brahman, spirit soul. We are not actually the
body. Awareness of aham brahmasmi (“I am Brahman’”) is actual selfrealization. According to Vedic culture, one must understand that he is
Brahman, not the body. We should not remain in ignorance like cats and
dogs, thinking, “I am this body, | am American, I am Indian, I am
bradhmana, | am ksatriya, | am Hindu, I am Muslim,” and so on. These
are all bodily designations. When one comes to spiritual understanding,
he understands aham brahmasmi, “I am Brahman.”’ This is called
Brahman realization. It is not that we become Brahman by some practice.
Gold is gold, even if it is covered with some dirt, which can certainly be
removed. Similarly, we are all Brahman, spirit soul, but somehow or
other we have come in contact with these material elements (bhimir dpo
‘nalo vayuh), and we have acquired bodily coverings. Consequently we
think, “‘I am this body.” This is ignorance, and unless one is enlightened
by spiritual knowledge, he remains animalistic.

Understanding one’s spiritual identity is called dharma. The ultimate
goal of dharma is enunciated by Sri Krsna Himself in Bhagavad-gita
(18.66) . Sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam Saranam vraja: ‘“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me.” On this earth
we have created so many dharmas—Hindu dharma, Muslim dharma,
Christian dharma. These are all manufactured dharmas, but real
dharma is attained when we come to the conclusion that Sri Krsna is

everything. Again, in the words of Sri Krsna in Bhagavad-gita (7.19):
6 Teachings of Lord Kapila

bahiinam janmandm ante
Jfidnavan mam prapadyate
vadsudevah sarvam iti
sa mahdatma sudurlabhah

‘After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is.
Such a great soul is very rare.”

The Krsna consciousness movement is meant for the propagation of
this message. We are not preaching a particular sectarian religious
system but a real religion, dharma. Dharmam tu sdksdd bhagavatpranitam: no one actually knows what dharma is, and no one can
manufacture dharma. Dharma is the order of the Supreme Being. No
one can manufacture state laws; they are given by the government. The
simplest definition of dharma is that dharma is the order of the Supreme
Being. Since the Supreme Being, God, is one, His order must be one.
How, then, can there be different dharmas? It is not possible. Different
dharmas are created due to ignorance, which causes people to think
in terms of Hindu dharma, Muslim dharma, Christian dharma, this
dharma or that dharma. No. Gold is gold. If a Christian possesses some
gold, does it become Christian gold? Gold is gold whether possessed by a
Hindu, a Muslim or a Christian. According to the order of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, dharma means surrendering unto that Supreme
Being. This is bhdgavata-dharma, and everyone should be taught how to
surrender unto God. God is one; there cannot be two Gods. When there is
competition, there is no God. Presently there is a different God on every
street, but Krsna is not that kind of God. He is the Supreme God. As
Krsna Himself states in Bhagavad-gita (7.7):

mattah parataram ndnyat
kificid asti dhanajijaya

mayi sarvam idam protam
siitre mani-ganda iwa

“O conqueror of wealth [Arjuna], there is no truth superior to Me.
Everything rests upon Me, as pearls are strung on a thread.”’
The purpose of this Krsna consciousness movement is to inform
The Purpose of Lord Kapila’s Advent 7

everyone that no one is superior to Krsna, God. Because many young
Americans and Europeans are fortunate and know nothing of any
hodgepodge god, they have taken this bona fide Krsna consciousness
movement seriously. Krsnas tu bhagavan svayam: Bhagavan, God,
means Sri Krsna. We have simply presented this information, saying,
“Here is God. Sri Krsna.” Because they have taken this seriously, many
young Americans and Europeans are advancing in Krsna consciousness.
Consequently many people are surprised to see how Americans and
Europeans have become such great devotees and are dancing in ecstasy.
How is it they are so advanced? They have taken the information
seriously: krsnas tu bhagavan svayam. Whether one touches fire blindly
or knowingly, fire will burn. It is not that because the fire is touched by a
child, fire will not burn. These young Westerners have touched fire, and
consequently it is acting as fire.

Acéryopdsanam: this information (krsnas tu bhagavan svayam) is not
concocted, but is accepted by the dcdryas in the disciplic succession.
Although an impersonalist, Saikaracarya has accepted Krsna as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. So have Ramanujacarya, Madhvacarya,
Visnusvami, Nimbarka and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His followers.
They all accept Krsna as the Supreme, just as Arjuna himself did. This is
the simplest method. There is no need to speculate, ““What is God?
Where is God?”’ Why foolishly go on searching? Here is God—Krsna.
We may think that Krsna cannot be seen, but Krsna can appear in the
form of His energy. Of course, a stone is not God, but a stone is another
one of God’s energies. Heat and light are not fire, but without fire there cannot be heat or light. In that sense, heat and light are nondifferent

from fire. This material world is like the heat and light of the supreme
fire.
ekadeSsa-sthitasydgner
Jyotsna vistdrini yatha
parasya brahmanah Saktis
tathedam akhilam jagat

“Just as a fire is situated in one place, but spreads illumination all
around, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Parabrahman, spreads His
energies throughout this universe.” (Visnu Purdna 1.22.53)

The sun is situated in one place, and its light and heat expand
8 Teachings of Lord Kapila

throughout the entire solar system. As soon as we perceive light and
heat, we can understand that the sun is there. Since light and heat can be
perceived by everyone, Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (7.8), prabhasmi
Sasi-siiryayoh: “I am the light of the sun and the moon.” People are saying, ““Can you show me God?”’ while not realizing that they are seeing
God daily at every moment. Because people are foolish in this age, they
cannot understand that when we perceive the energy of the Lord, we can
feel the presence of the Lord.

The young devotees in the Krsna consciousness movement are presently worshiping Krsna. What are the signs of a devotee? The actual sign
of a devotee is that he is no longer interested in material enjoyment: bhaktih paresanubhavo viraktir anyatra ca (Bhag. 11.2.42). The
disciples of this Krsna consciousness movement do not go to cinemas,
restaurants or clubs, and they do not smoke or drink. In European and
American countries all these things are available and are very cheap, but
these young people are not interested in them. They are simply interested in sitting on the floor and learning about Krsna consciousness.
Why is this? They have actually rejected the material world. When one
comes to detest material enjoyment, one can understand that he has advanced spiritually. Spiritual life does not mean taking sannydsa and then
smoking or drinking tea. One must actually come to detest material life.
One comes to lose interest in material activities and becomes interested
only in the understanding of God, the Supreme Being, and His service.

As enjoined in Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.1):

nayam deho deha-bhajam nrloke
kastan kaman arhate vid-bhujam ye

“Of all the living entities who have accepted material bodies in this
world, one who has been awarded this human form should not work hard
day and night simply for sense gratification, which is available even for
the dogs and hogs that eat stool.”” The word vid-bhujém means “‘stooleaters.’’ Hogs work hard day and night simply eating stool, and because
stool contains chemicals, hydrophosphates, the hog gets strength,
becomes very fat and enjoys sex. In any case, human life is meant not for
imitating the life of a hog but for tapasya, austerity:
The Purpose of Lord Kapila’s Advent 9

tapo divyam putrakd yena sattvam
suddhyed yasmdad brahma-saukhyam tv anantam

‘Rather, my dear boys, one should engage in penance and austerity to attain the divine position of devotional service. By such activity, one’s
heart is purified, and when one attains this position, he attains eternal,
blissful life, which is transcendental to material happiness and which
continues forever.” (Bhag. 5.5.1)

This is the meaning of Vedic civilization. The society of varndsramadharma—composed of brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas, sidras, grhasthas,
vanaprasthas, brahmacaris and sannydsis—is meant to elevate people
pradually to the perfect stage of understanding God. The whole aim of
the different varnas and Gsramas is the worship of the Supreme Lord.
One can attain this understanding through this social system, which admits of gradations. When one goes to school, he begins with the first
erade, then progresses to the second, third and so forth. In this way one
makes progress.

When human society accepts varndsrama-dharma, it can gradually
come to the understanding of Brahman. By birth, everyone is a Sidra;
therefore everyone has to be educated. The word dvija means “‘twiceborn.” One is first born through the womb of a mother, and one’s next
birth is given by the spiritual master and Vedic knowledge. Vedic
knowledge is the mother, and the spiritual master is the father. When
one is twice-born (dvija), he receives a sacred thread from the spiritual
master and begins to learn about spiritual life. He is then allowed to read
the Vedic literatures. In this way one becomes a son of Vedic literature.
Nigama-kalpa-taror galitarn phalam: Srimad-Bhaégavatam is the
essence of Vedic culture. It is a wish-fulfilling tree, and we can take
whatever we want from it. Vedic knowledge is perfect, and if we want to
come to know it, we must take shelter of a bona fide guru (tadvijhanartham sa gurum evabhigacchet).

Unfortunately, in this age everything is mismanaged. People forget
the aim of life, and at such a time the Supreme Lord Himself comes. The
Supreme Lord descends out of compassion because He is more anxious to
have us return home, back to Godhead, than we are to go. Because we are
in ignorance, we do not know anything about the kingdom of God. We
10 Teachings of Lord Kapila

know nothing about how to get there or how to become happy. We have
forgotten all this. Therefore Krsna comes at intervals or sends His representative, the pure devotee. Sometimes He comes personally, and sometimes He sends His incarnation.

Kapiladeva is an incarnation of the Supreme Person, Krsna. Therefore
it is stated: kapilas tattva-sankhyata bhagavan Gtma-mayayd. The word
maya means not only “‘illusion,” but also ‘‘affection” and “energy.”
When Krsna comes, all His energies also come. It is not that He is forced
to come. We have to accept a certain type of body because we are forced
to do so, but this is not the case with Sri Krsna. Presently I may have a
human form, but in the future I cannot demand a human form. We
receive bodies in the next life according to karma, not will. One cannot
demand to be a high-court judge unless one has been educated for the
job. First of all, one must become qualified. If one qualifies himself, one
may become a devatd, a demigod like Indra or Candra, or one can become
a dog or a cat. That depends on one’s karma, or activities (karmand
daiva-netrena). When Krsna or His incarnation come, they do not
depend on karma for their bodies. The Supreme Lord is above karma
and is fully independent. It is therefore said, dtma-mdyayd. The
Supreme Lord comes by His own energy, not by the external energy or
by force. When the governor visits the prison, he is not forced to do so.
He is not to be considered a condemned person; rather, he goes by his
own good will just to see how things are going on. However, it is understood that when an ordinary person is placed in jail, he is sent there by
force because he has been proven a criminal. A criminal may think that
he and the governor are one, just as rascals and fools think that Krsna is
one of them. Avajdnanti mam midhaé maGnusim tanum Gsritam. A
knowledgeable person knows that when Krsna or His incarnation descends upon the material world, the Supreme Lord maintains His transcendental position. He is not an ordinary man, nor is He forced into the
material world due to karma. The Supreme Lord comes by His own good
will. Param bhévam ajanantah. Rascals cannot understand what Krsna
is; therefore they think that Krsna is a human being. As Krsna Himself
states in Bhagavad-gita (7.3):

manusydnam sahasresu
kascid yatati siddhaye
The Purpose of Lord Kapila’s Advent 11

yatatam api siddhanam
kascin mam vetti tattvatah

‘Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection,
and of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in
truth.”

Understanding Krsna is therefore not so easy. As stated by Krsna, out
of many thousands one person may become a siddha, a self-realized
being. And out of many siddhas, one may be able to understand Krsna. It
is our great fortune that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Krsna Himself, has
appeared and given us a very easy process by which we can understand
Krsna. What is that process? We need only hear about Krsna. That’s all.
We have therefore opened all these centers of Krsna consciousness
throughout the world.

Srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah
punya-sravana-kirtanah
hrdy antah-stho hy abhadrani

vidhunoti suhrt satam

“Sri Krsna, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Paramatma
[Supersoul] in everyone’s heart and the benefactor of the truthful
devotee, cleanses desire for material enjoyment from the heart of the
devotee who has developed the urge to hear His messages, which are in
themselves virtuous when properly heard and chanted.” (Bhag. 1.2.17)
If we hear about Krsna, we become purified. Hearing about Krsna
means associating with Krsna. In this way we may perfect our lives.
CHAPTER TWO

The Transcendental Master
and Supreme Yogi

TEXT 2

na hy asya varsmanah pumsam
varimnah sarva-yoginadm
visrutau Sruta-devasya
bhiri trpyanti me ’savah

TRANSLATION

Saunaka continued: There is no one who knows more than the
Lord Himself. No one is more worshipable or more mature a yogi
than He. He is therefore the master of the Vedas, and to hear about
Him always is the actual pleasure of the senses.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gitd it is stated that no one can be equal to or greater
than the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is confirmed in the Vedas
also: eko bahiindm yo vidadhati kadman. He is the supreme living entity
and is supplying the necessities of all other living entities. Thus all other
living entities, both visnu-tattva and jiva-tattva, are subordinate to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. The same concept is confirmed
here. Na hy asya varsmanah pumsam: among living entities, no one can
surpass the Supreme Person because no one is richer, more famous,
stronger, more beautiful, wiser or more renounced than He. These
qualifications make Him the Supreme Godhead, the cause of all causes.
Yogis are very proud of performing wonderful feats, but no one can compare to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Anyone who is associated with the Supreme Lord is accepted as a firstclass yogi. Devotees may not be as powerful as the Supreme Lord, but by

13
14 Teachings of Lord Kapila

constant association with the Lord they become as good as the Lord Himself. Sometimes the devotees act more powerfully than the Lord. Of
course, that is the Lord’s concession.

Also used here is the word varimnah, meaning the most worshipful of
all yogis. To hear from Krsna is the real pleasure of the senses; therefore
he is known as Govinda, for by His words, by His teachings, by His instruction—by everything connected with Him—He enlivens the senses.
Whatever He instructs is from the transcendental platform, and His instructions, being absolute, are nondifferent from Him. Hearing from
Krsna or His expansion or plenary expansion like Kapila is very pleasing
to the senses. Bhagavad-gita can be read or heard many times, but
because it gives great pleasure, the more one reads Bhagavad-gitd the
more he wants to read and understand it, and each time he gets new
enlightenment. That is the nature of the transcendental message.
Similarly, we find that transcendental happiness in the SrimadBhaégavatam. The more we hear and chant the glories of the Lord, the
more we become happy.

In the previous verse, the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as Devahiti-putra Kapiladeva has been explained as bhagavdn
dtma-mdyayd. The word bhaga means “‘opulence,”’ and vdn means “‘one
who possesses.” All the opulences of the creation are present in

Bhagavan. As stated in the Vedas (Katha Upanisad 2.2.13):

nityo nityanadm cetanas cetananam
eko bahiinadm yo vidadhati kiman

Nitya, Bhagavan, is the singular, and nitydndm are the plural jivas, or
living beings. Nityo nitydndm: we are many, but God is one. There is no
limit to the jivas; no one can count them. The word ananta means that
they are without limit. All these jivas, living entities, are being maintained by the Supreme One. We cannot conceive how many living entities
are being maintained by the Supreme Lord. All the great elephants, all
the small ants, all the 8,400,000 species of life are maintained by
Bhagavan. Why do we worry that He will not maintain us? Those who
are devotees of the Lord and have taken shelter at His lotus feet, leaving
everything aside simply to render service unto Him, will certainly be
cared for. In our Krsna consciousness movement, we have over a
The Transcendental Master and Supreme Yogi 15

hundred centers, and Krsna is maintaining them all. None of our
devotees are employed for independent incomes, yet they are all being
maintained. In Bhagavad-gita, Krsna never says, “Do this or that, and I
will then maintain you.” Rather, He states that not only will He maintain
us, but He will also protect us from the results of sin, from sinful karma
(Bg. 18.66). All of this assurance is there.

Tasyaiva hetoh prayateta kovidah. The word kovidah means “‘intelligent.”” An intelligent person should try to attain shelter at the lotus
feet of Krsna. Human life is actually meant for getting in touch with the
lotus feet of Krsna. That should be our only business. The word upari indicates the higher planetary systems. There are seven higher planetary
systems, and we are in the middle system, in Bhirloka. Within this one
universe, there are fourteen planetary systems, and the living entities
are wandering in different bodily forms on different planets. According
to karma, the living entity sometimes goes up and sometimes goes down.
He wanders in this way, thinking how he can become materially happy
and satisfy his senses. The Sdstras say that we should not do this, that we
should endeavor to understand Krsna. We should not worry about eating
and sleeping, for the needs of the body are already arranged. We do not
have to work independently to maintain the body.

tal labhyate duhkhavad anyatah sukham

kdlena sarvatra gabhira-ramhasd

Our actual endeavor should be to attain happiness; that is our real struggle for existence. According to the Sdstras: tal labhyate duhkhavat. The
word duhkhavat indicates that although we do not want misery, misery
comes anyway. We don’t have to endeavor separately for misery. No one
says, “Let there be a fire in my house”’ or “Let my child die.”’ No one
aspires after these things, yet they happen. Everyone is thinking, ““May
my child live happily” or “May I get so much money.” We do not ask or
pray for catastrophes, yet they come without invitation. Similarly,
whatever happiness is there for our enjoyment will also come without
our asking for it. The conclusion is that we should not endeavor for socalled happiness or distress, but should try to attain that position
whereby we can understand Krsna and get shelter at His lotus feet. This
should be the real human endeavor.
16 Teachings of Lord Kapila

It was Caitanya Mahaprabhu who said to Ripa Gosvami:

brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva
guru-krsna-prasdde pdya bhakti-latd-bija

“The living entity is wandering up and down, from one planet to
another, and he is very fortunate if by the mercy of the spiritual master
and Krsna Himself he can get the seed of devotional service to Krsna.”’
(Cc. Madhya 19.151) The Krsna consciousness movement is an attempt
to make people fortunate. In this age, everyone is unfortunate (mandabhagyah), but now we are trying to reverse the situation.

Throughout the world there are problems everywhere. One country
has one type of problem, and another country has another. There is strife
within governments themselves, and even presidents are fraught with
problems. Sometimes we may think we are very fortunate, just as President Nixon was thinking, “I am very fortunate. I have become the president of the United States.’ Then he soon realized that he was most
unfortunate. Actually this is the situation for everyone. We should not
think that the only apprehended culprit is President Nixon and that we
are safe. There is a Bengali proverb: Dry cow dung is used for fuel, and
it is said that when the dry cow dung is being burned, the soft cow dung
is laughing, saying, “Oh, you are being burned, but I am safe.” It does
not know that when it dries out, it will be thrown into the fire too. We
may laugh because President Nixon is in trouble, and we may think ourselves very safe because we have a big bank balance, but actually no one
is safe. Eventually everyone will dry up and be thrown in the fire. That is
a fact. We may survive for a few years, but we cannot avoid death. In
fact, it is said, ‘““As sure as death.”’ And what is the result of death? One
loses everything—all honor, money, position and material life itself.
Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita (10.34), mrtyuh sarva-haras caham: “I
am all-devouring death.” Krsna comes as death and plunders everything—bank balance, skyscrapers, wife, children and whatever. One
cannot say, “My dear death, please give me some time to adjust.”’ There
is no adjustment; one must immediately get out.

Foolish people are unaware of the miserable conditions of material
life. Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (13.9), janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhiduhkha-dosdnudarsanam. Real knowledge means knowing that however
The Transcendental Master and Supreme Yogi 17

great one may be, the four principles of material life are present: birth,
old age, disease and death. These exist in the highest planetary system
(Brahmaloka) and in the lowest (Patalaloka).

tasyaiva hetoh prayateta kovido
na labhyate yad bhramatam upary adhah
tal labhyate duhkhavad anyatah sukham
kdlena sarvatra gabhira-ramhasa

‘‘Persons who are actually intelligent and philosophically inclined should
endeavor only for that purposeful end which is not obtainable even by
wandering from the topmost planet down to the lowest planet. As far as
happiness derived from sense enjoyment is concerned, it can be obtained
automatically in course of time, just as in course of time we obtain miseries even though we do not desire them.”’ (Bhag. 1.5.18)

When Dharmardaja asked Maharaja Yudhisthira what the most wonderful thing in the world was, Maharaja Yudhisthira replied: ahany ahani
bhitdni gacchantiha yamdélayam. “‘Every moment people are dying, but
those who are living are thinking, “My friend has died, but I shall live
forever.’ (Mahabharata, Vana-parva 313.116) Soft cow dung thinks
the same way. This is typical of conditioned beings.

Bhagavan, the Supreme Lord, is not in this position. It is therefore
said: bhagavdn dtma-mayayd. We come onto this planet to enjoy or
suffer life for a few days—fifty or a hundred years— but Bhagavan, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, does not come for that purpose (na
mam karmani limpanti). It is further stated, na hy asya varsmanah:
‘No one is greater than Him.” No one is greater than Bhagavan or
equal to Him. Everyone is inferior. According to Caitanya-caritamrta
(A4di5.142), ekale isvara krsna, dra saba bhrtya. There is only one
master—Krsna. All others are subservient, beginning with Lord
Brahma, Visnu, Mahesvara, Indra, Candra and all the demigods (there
are thirty-three million demigods) and the middle and lower species.
Everyone is bhrtya, or servant. When Krsna orders, “My dear Mr. Soand-So, now please give up your place and leave,’ one must go.
Therefore everyone is a servant. This is the position of Lord Brahma and
the ant as well. Yas tv indragopam athavendram aho sva-karma. From
18 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Lord Indra to indragopa, an insignificant insect, everyone is reaping the
consequences of his karma. We are creating our own karma, our next
body, in this life. In this life we enjoy or suffer the results of our past
karma, and in the same way we are creating further karma for our next
body. Actually we should work in such a way that we will not get another
material body. How can this be done? We simply have to try to understand Krsna. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (4.9):

Janma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva deham punar janma
naiti mdm eti so ‘rjuna

“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this
material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.”

This sounds very simple, but actually understanding Krsna is very
difficult. If we become devotees of Krsna, understanding Krsna is easy.
However, if we try to understand Him by jfiana, karma or yoga, we will
be frustrated. There are many types of yogis, but he who is devoted to
Krsna is the topmost yogi. Sri Krsna is far above all yogic processes. In
India there are many yogis who can display some magical feats. They can
walk on water, make themselves very light or very heavy and so forth.
But what is this compared to Krsna’s yogic mystic powers? By His potencies, great planets are floating in space. Who can manage to float even a
small stone in the air? Sometimes a yogi may show a little mystic power
by manufacturing some gold, and we are so foolish that we accept him as
God. However, we forget that the real yogi, the Supreme Lord Himself,
has created millions of gold mines and is floating them in space. Those
who are Krsna conscious are not befooled by yogis who claim to be
Bhagavan. A Krsna conscious person wants only to serve the foremost
yogi, Yogeévara (varimnah sarva-yogindm). Because we are trying to
become His devotees, we accept the Supreme Lord, Yogesvara, as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Krsna Himself states in Bhagavad-gita
(18.55):

bhaktya mam abhianati
yavan yas cdsmi tattvatah
The Transcendental Master and Supreme Yogi 19

tato mam tattvato jnatva
visate tad anantaram

‘One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme
Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.”

This process is actually very simple. One must first of all realize that
the first problem is the conquest of death. Presently we consider death
compulsory, but actually it is not. One may be put into prison, but actually prison is not compulsory. It is due to one’s work that one becomes
a criminal and is therefore put in jail. It is not compulsory for everyone to go to jail. As living entities, we have our proper place in

Vaikunthaloka.

paras tasmat tu bhavo ‘nyo
vyakto ’vyaktat sandtanah

yah sa sarvesu bhitesu
nasyatsu na vinasyati

avyakto ’ksara ity uktas

tam Ghuh paramdam gatim
yam prapya na nivartante

tad dhéma paramam mama

‘‘There is another nature, which is eternal and is transcendental to this
manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is never annihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that part remains as it is.
That supreme abode is called unmanifested and infallible, and it is the
supreme destination. When one goes there, he never comes back. That is
My supreme abode.” (Bg. 8.20-21)

Everything is present in Vaikunthaloka. There we can have an eternal, blissful life full of knowledge (sac-cid-Gnanda). It is not compulsory
for us to rot in this material world. The easiest way to go to the
Vaikunthalokas is: janma karma ca me divyam evam yo vetti tattvatah.
Simply try to understand Krsna. Why does He come? What are His activities? Where does He come from? Why does He come in the form of a
human being? We only have to try to understand this and study Krsna as
20 Teachings of Lord Kapila

He explains Himself in Bhagavad-gitd. What is the difficulty? God personally explains Himself as He is, and if we accept Bhagavad-gité as it is,
we shall no longer have to transmigrate. T'yaktvad deham punar janma
naiti. We shall no longer have to endure birth and death, for we can attain our spiritual bodies (sac-cid-Gnanda-vigraha) and live happily in
Krsna’s family. Krsna is providing for us here, and He will also provide
for us there. So we should know that our happiness is in returning home,
back to Godhead, where we can eat, drink and be merry in Krsna’s
company. |
CHAPTER THREE

How to Understand
the Lord’s Activities

TEXT 3

yad yad vidhatte bhagavan
svacchandatmatma-mdayaya

tani me sraddadhanasya
kirtanyany anukirtaya

TRANSLATION

Therefore please precisely describe all the activities and
pastimes of the Personality of Godhead, who is full of self-desire
and who assumes all these activities by His internal potency.

PURPORT

The word anukirtaya is very significant. Anukirtaya means “‘to follow
the description” —not to create a concocted mental description, but to
follow. Saunaka Rsi requested Sata Gosvami to describe what he had actually heard from his spiritual master, Sukadeva Gosvami, about the
transcendental pastimes that the Lord manifested by His internal energy.
Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has no material body,
but He can assume any kind of body by His supreme will. That is made
possible by His internal energy.

We can understand the pastimes of the Lord by following one or some
of the authorized devotional processes.

Sravanam kirtanam visnoh
smaranam pdda-sevanam

21
22 Teachings of Lord Kapila

arcanam vandanam ddsyam
sakhyam dtma-nivedanam

‘‘Hearing, chanting and remembering the holy name, form, pastimes,
qualities and entourage of the Lord, offering service according to the
time, place and performer, worshiping the Deity, offering prayers, always considering oneself the eternal servant of Krsna, making friends
with Him and dedicating everything unto Him—these are the nine processes of devotional service.” (Bhag. 7.5.23)

There are nine basic processes of devotional service—hearing and
chanting about the Supreme Lord, remembering Him, serving His lotus
feet, worshiping Him, offering prayers to the Lord, acting as His servant,
becoming His friend, and surrendering everything to Him. The beginning is Sravanam kirtanam, hearing and chanting. One must be very

eager to hear and chant. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (9.14):

satatam kirtayanto mam
yatantas ca drdha-vrataéh

namasyantas ca mam bhaktya
nitya-yukta updsate

‘Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination,
bowing down before Me, the great souls perpetually worship Me with
devotion.”

We have to speak or chant about the holy activities of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but first we have to hear about them. This
Srimad-Bhagavatam was recited by Sukadeva Gosvami and heard
by Pariksit Maharaja, and we in turn have to hear about Krsna and then
chant about Him (Sravanam kirtanam visnoh). When we speak of Visnu,
we mean Krsna. Krsna is the origin of the visnu-tattva —that is, Visnu is
an expansion of Krsna. When we speak of Visnu, we understand that the
origin of Visnu is Krsna. As Sri Krsna says in Bhagavad-gité (10.2),
aham ddir hi devanam: “I am the source of the demigods.”

The most important demigods (devas) are Brahma, Siva and Visnu. In
the beginning of the creation there is Lord Visnu, and from Lord Visnu,
Brahma is born. From Lord Brahma, Lord Siva is born, and these three
gods take charge of the three modes of material nature. Visnu takes
How to Understand the Lord’s Activities 23

charge of sattva-guna (the mode of goodness), Lord Brahmi takes charge
of rajo-guna (the mode of passion), and Lord Siva takes charge of tamoguna (the mode of ignorance). However, before the creation there was
no Brahmi or Siva. There was only Krsna. Krsna therefore says, aham
ddir hi devandm. He is the creator of all demigods and all other living
entities. After the cosmic manifestation is created, the living entities are
placed in it. Therefore in the Vedas it is stated that in the beginning
there was neither Brahma nor Siva, but only Narayana (eko ndraéyana
dsit). Narayana is also another plenary expansion of Krsna.

We have to learn from the scriptures that Krsna is the origin of all.
Krsnas tu bhagavan svayam: all the visnu-tattvas and incarnations are
but plenary expansions or expansions of the plenary expansions of
Krsna. There are millions and millions of incarnations. They are as
plentiful as waves in the ocean. There are Saktydvesa-avatdras, gunaavatdras and svayam-avataras, and these are all described in SrimadBhagavatam. All these avatdras, or incarnations, are svacchandatma,
free from care and anxiety. If we organize a business, we have many
anxieties. The managing director or proprietor of the business particularly has many anxieties. Although he sits in his office without disturbance, he is not very happy because he is always thinking about how to
do this or that, how to manage this affair or that. This is material nature,
and therefore it is said that there is always anxiety in the material world.
When Hiranyakasipu, the father of Prahlada Maharaja, asked his son,
‘““My dear boy, what is the best thing you have learned from your
teachers?”’ Prahlada Maharaja immediately replied, tat sddhu manye
‘sura-varya dehinam sada samudvigna-dhiyadm asad-grahat (Bhag.
7.5.5). “I have learned that materialists have accepted the asad guna.”’
Asat means “‘that which is not.’’ We should not remain on this platform,
but should go to the platform of sat (om tat sat). This is the Vedic injunction. The material world is asad-vastu; it cannot possibly remain. In the
material world, everything will ultimately be vanquished. Whatever exists in the material world exists only for some time. It is temporary. The
Mayavadi philosophers say, brahma satyam jagan mithyd: ‘The
Supreme Truth is real, whereas the world is false’’—but Vaisnavas do
not use the word mithya (false), because God, the Supreme Brahman, is
truth, and nothing false can emanate from the truth. If we prepare an
earring from gold, the earring is also gold. We cannot say that the
24. Teachings of Lord Kapila

earring is false. Yato imdni bhitdni jdyante: the Supreme Absolute
Truth is He from whom everything is emanating. If everything is
emanating from the Absolute Truth, nothing can actually be false. The
Vaisnava philosophers accept the world as temporary, but not false, as
the Mayavadi philosophers do.

The world (jagat) has emanated from the Supreme; therefore it is not
mithyd, but it is temporary. That is also explained in Bhagavad-gita
(8.19): bhatva bhitva praliyate. The material world comes into existence, remains for some time, and is then annihilated. It is not false, for
it can be utilized to realize the Supreme Truth. This is Vaisnava philosophy. The world is temporary, but we must use it for spiritual purposes. If
something is used for the ultimate truth, the Absolute Truth, it becomes
integral with the Absolute Truth. As stated by Srila Rapa Gosvami:

andsaktasya visayan
yatharham upayunjatah

nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe
yuktam vairagyam ucyate

praparicikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunah
mumuksubhih paritydgo
vairagyam phalgu kathyate
(Bhakti-rasémrta-sindhu 1.2.255-256)

The word mumuksubhih refers to those who aspire for mukti, liberation. When one becomes disgusted with material engagement, one wants
to destroy everything that has anything to do with the material world.
However, the Vaisnava says, prdparicikataya buddhya hari-sambandhivastunah. Everything has some relationship with the Supreme Person,
the Absolute Truth. For instance, a microphone is made of metal, but
what is metal? It is another form of earth. In Bhagavad-gita (7.4) Sri
Krsna says:

bhimir dpo ’nalo véayuh
kham mano buddhir eva ca
How to Understand the Lord’s Activities 25

ahankara itiyam me
bhinna prakrtir astadha

‘Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all
together these comprise My separated material energies.” All of these are
Krsna’s energies, and if Krsna is the source of them, how can they be
untrue? They are not. A Vaisnava will never say that metal has no connection with Krsna. It is a product of one of His energies, just as this
material world is a product of the sun. We cannot say that the sunshine is
false and that the sun is true. If the sun is true, the sunshine is also true.
Similarly, we do not say that the material universe is false. It may be
temporary, but it is not false. Therefore the Gosvamis and Krsna Himself
tell us that since everything belongs to Krsna, everything should be
utilized for His purpose.

This creation emanates from Bhagavan, the Supreme Lord, who is
without anxiety. Krsna very pleasantly associates with His consort
Srimati Radharani and enjoys playing His flute. If God is anxious, what
kind of God is He? Even Lord Brahma and other demigods are anxious.
Lord Brahma is engaged in meditation, Lord Siva dances to annihilate the
universe, the goddess Kali is engaged in killing with her sword, and so
forth. The demigods have many activities, but Krsna is always peaceful.
The Krsna who engages in killing demons is Vasudeva Krsna, not the
original Krsna. The original Krsna does not go anywhere; He never takes
a step away from Vrndavana. The other activities performed by Krsna
are performed in the Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Aniruddha or Pradyumna
forms. Krsna expands as Sankarsana, Narayana, Visnu, Maha-Visnu,
Garbhodakasayi Visnu and Ksirodakasayi Visnu. God can expand Himself in many, many forms.

advaitam acyutam anddim ananta-riipam
ddyam purdna-purusam nava-yauvanam ca

(Brahma-samhita 5.33)

He is the ddi-purusa, the original soul of all. Govindam ddi-purusam
tam aham bhajami: Lord Brahmi says that he is not ddi-purusa but that
Govinda, Krsna, is the ddi-purusa. This Krsna has many expansions
26 Teachings of Lord Kapila

(advaitam acyutam anddim). He has no beginning, but He is the beginning of everything. He has expanded Himself in many forms. The visnutattva consists of bhagavat-tattva-svdmsa, the personal expansions. We
are also Krsna’s forms, but we are vibhinndmsa, separated expansions.
We are the expansions of the energies. According to Krsna in Bhagavad
gita (7.5):

apareyam itas tv anyam
prakrtim viddhi me param
Jiva-bhitam mahaé-baho

yayedam dharyate jagat

“Besides the inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior
energy of Mine, which consists of the living entities who are struggling
with material nature and are sustaining the universe.”

Thus there are the jiva-prakrti, the pard prakrti expansions, who
belong to Krsna’s superior energy. In any case, Krsna is always svacchandétmaé—without anxiety. Even if He is killing a demon, He experiences no anxiety. That is also confirmed in the Vedas:

na tasya kéryam karanam ca vidyate
na tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyate

pardsya saktir vividhaiva srityate
svdbhaviki jidna-bala-kriya ca

“The Supreme Lord has nothing to do, for everything is done automatically by His various potencies. No one is seen to be equal to, or
greater than, Him.” (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8)

Sri Krsna has nothing to do personally. It is His energy that acts. When
an important man wants to get something done, he simply tells his secretary, who does everything. The important man is quite confident that
because he has told his secretary, his desires will be carried out. The secretary is a person, energy (Sakti). If an ordinary man within this world
has many energies in the form of secretaries, then we can hardly imagine
the energies possessed by Sri Krsna. Sri Krsna is jagad-isvara, the controller of the entire universe, and thus He is managing the entire
How to Understand the Lord’s Activities 27

universe. Foolish people say that there is no brain behind the universe,
but this is due to ignorance. By taking information from the Sdstras, the
scriptures, we can understand who that brain is. According to Sri Krsna

in Bhagavad-gita (9.10):

mayddhyaksena prakrtih
suyate sa-caracaram

hetundnena kaunteya
Jagad viparivartate

“This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunti,
and producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this
manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.”’ We see His
energies working in this material world all the time. There is thunder
and rain, and from rain comes the food we enjoy. This process is outlined

in Bhagavad-gita (3.14):

anndd bhavanti bhitani
parjanydd anna-sambhavah

yajnad bhavati parjanyo
yajriah karma-samudbhavah

“All living beings subsist on food grains, which are produced from rains.
Rains are produced by performance of yajfa [sacrifice], and yajfia is
born of prescribed duties.’’ The origin of everything is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Through yajiia, sacrifice, we have to satisfy the
Supreme Person, and yajfias can be executed when human society is
regulated according to the varnasrama-dharma, the system of four social
orders (varnas) and four spiritual orders (asramas). There are four
varnas (brahmana, ksatriya, vaigsya and Sidra) and four dsramas
(brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprastha and sannydsa). These varnas and
dsSramas have their respective duties, and unless human society is
divided according to these eight scientific divisions and everyone acts according to his position, there can be no peace in the world.

varnasramacdravata
purusena parah puman
28 Teachings of Lord Kapila

visnur dradhyate pantha
ndnyat tat-tosa-kéranam

‘The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu, is worshiped by the
proper execution of prescribed duties in the system of varna and asrama.
There is no other way to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead.”
(Visnu Purana 3.8.9)

The ultimate goal of all activity is the satisfaction of the Supreme
Lord, Visnu. Na te viduh svartha-gatim hi visnum (Bhdg. 7.5.31).
Foolish people do not know that their ultimate interest is the satisfaction
of Visnu. Therefore, when there are dharmasya glanih, discrepancies in
dharma, Krsna or His incarnation personally comes. It is therefore said:
yad yad vidhatte bhagavan. Although He comes, He has no anxiety. He
comes by His internal potency, and He does not take help from anyone.
He possesses a variety of energies, all of which work correctly and perfectly (pardsya saktir vividhaiva Sriiyate svabhaviki jndna-bala-kriya
ca).

Impersonalists cannot understand how everything is being carried out
perfectly because they cannot understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead: mohitam nabhijanati mdm ebhyah param avyayam. As stated
by Krsna in Bhagavad-gita (7.14):

daivi hy esd gunamayi
mama mday4 duratyaya

mam eva ye prapadyante
mayam etam taranti te

“This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material
nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me
can easily cross beyond it.”’ Being covered by the three modes of material
nature, one cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
However, the Supreme Lord reveals Himself to His devotees.

It is our business to understand Krsna in truth; then our lives will be
successful. It is not that we can succeed by understanding Krsna superficially. It is therefore stated here: tani me sraddadhdanasya kirtanyany
anukirtaya. The word anukirtaya, as we have initially pointed out,
means that we should not manufacture anything. The word anu means
How to Understand the Lord’s Activities 29

“to follow.” Therefore the bhagavat-tattva, or Bhagavan, can be understood only by the parampara system, the system of disciplic succession.

evam parampara-praptam
imam rdjarsayo viduh
sa kalaneha mahata
yogo nastah parantapa

‘This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way. But in course
of time the succession was broken, and therefore the science as it is appears to be lost.’ (Bg. 4.2)

Formerly the kings (rajds) were great saintly persons. They were not
ordinary people engaged in drinking and dancing. They were all rsis
(sages), up to the time of Maharaja Pariksit. They were trained in such a
way that they were not ordinary men -but were called naradeva.
Naradeva refers to Bhagavan in the form of a human being. The king
was worshiped because he was a rajarsi, both a king and a sage. Sri Krsna
says that if the king knows the purpose of life, he can rule well. If he
does not, he thinks that eating, sleeping, sex and defense are all in all. In
this case, his subjects live like animals. Today no one knows the object of
human life; therefore although the foolish people of this age are trying
to be happy, their hopes will never be fulfilled. Na te viduh svarthagatim hi visnum durdsaydh. People are trying to be happy in this
material world by accepting material objects, but their plans will never
be fulfilled. Therefore in world history we see that there have been many
leaders who have died working hard. They could not adjust things properly, despite all their hard efforts. There were Napoleon, Hitler,
Gandhi, Nehru and many others, but they could not ultimately prevail.
This is durdsaya. The ultimate goal of life is to understand Visnu, yet
people are going on blindly trying to satisfy their senses. If one blind
man tries to lead another, what is the result? If both the leaders and
followers are blind, they will all fall in a ditch, for they are all bound by
their nature.

Sravanam kirtanam, hearing and chanting, are the beginning of
bhakti, devotional service. Therefore it is said: téni me Ssraddadhdanasya
kirtanyadny anukirtaya. The word anukirtaya means to follow the
30 Teachings of Lord Kapila

parampara system. First of all we must receive the information from
authorities; then we can speak the truth. One first has to learn how to describe the Absolute Truth, Bhagavan—His actions, His mercy and His
compassion upon all living beings. The Supreme Lord is more anxious to
give us education and enlightenment than we are to receive them. He
gives us His literature, His devotees and the parampard system, but it is
up to us to take advantage of these. The Krsna consciousness movement
is intended to give society the proper understanding of the Absolute
Truth. We are not presenting a manufactured, bogus philosophy. Why
should we unnecessarily waste our time concocting some philosophy?
There is so much to be learned that has already been given by the
supreme authority. All we have to do is take this Vedic literature, try to
learn it and distribute it. That is Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s mission.

bharata-bhiimite haila manusya-janma yara
Janma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara

(Cc. Adi 9.41)

It is the duty of everyone, especially one born in the land of
Bharatavarsa, India, to make his life successful by taking advantage of
this Vedic literature. Unfortunately, we are simply trying to learn technology, and that is our misfortune. Real education means solving all life’s
problems.

Transcendental education means learning how to gain relief from the
entanglement of material life. This is made possible by learning about
the Lord’s transcendental activities.
CHAPTER FOUR

Approaching a Bona Fide Guru

TEXT 4

suta uvaca
dvaipdyana-sakhas tv evam
maitreyo bhagavams tatha
prahedam viduram prita
dnviksikyam pracoditah

TRANSLATION

Sri Sita Gosvami said: The most powerful sage Maitreya was
a friend of Vydsadeva’s. Being encouraged and pleased by Vidura’s
inquiry about transcendental knowledge, Maitreya spoke as
follows.

PURPORT

Questions and answers are very satisfactorily dealt with when the inquirer is bona fide and the speaker is also authorized. Here Maitreya is
considered a powerful sage, and therefore he is also described as
bhagavan. This word can be used not only for the Supreme Personality
of Godhead but for anyone who is almost as powerful as the Supreme
Lord. Maitreya is addressed as bhagavan because he was spiritually far
advanced. He was a personal friend of Dvaipayana Vyasadeva, a literary
incarnation of the Lord. Maitreya was very pleased with the inquiries of
Vidura because they were the inquiries of a bona fide, advanced devotee.
Thus Maitreya was encouraged to answer. When there are discourses on
transcendental topics between devotees of equal mentality, the questions
and answers are very fruitful and encouraging.

This is the Vedic process for receiving knowledge. One must approach
the proper person, the guru, and submissively listen to him expound

31
32 Teachings of Lord Kapila

transcendental knowledge. As Sri Krsna advises in Bhagavad-gita

(4.34):

tad viddhi pranipdtena
pariprasnena sevaya

“Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. quire
from him submissively and render service unto him.”

Transcendental knowledge is not very difficult, but the process must
be known. Sometimes a dictating machine or a typewriter may not work,
but if we go to a technician who knows the machine, he can immediately
repair it. The process must be known. If one goes to a ditchdigger to
repair a dictating machine, he cannot help. He may know how to dig
ditches, but not repair a machine. Therefore the sdstras enjoin that if one
wants transcendental knowledge, one must approach the proper person.
The word tad-vijfidna refers to transcendental knowledge, not material
knowledge. A medical practitioner may have material knowledge of the
body, but he has no knowledge of the spirit soul within. He simply
studies the mechanical arrangement of the body, which is a machine
(yantra) made by nature. The body is actually stated in Bhagavad-gita
(18.61) to be a machine:

isvarah sarva-bhitanam
hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati

bhrdmayan sarva-bhitani
yantraridhani mayaya

‘The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a
machine made of the material energy.”

For those who are attached to this bodily machine, the yoga system is
recommended. One who is overly attached to the bodily conception is
taught to concentrate the mind by some physical gymnastics. Thus in
hatha-yoga one undergoes various physical disciplines, but the real purpose is to understand Visnu, the Supreme. The various yoga systems are
given for the machine of the body, but the process of bhakti is transcendental to mechanical arrangements. It is therefore called tad-vijiiana,
Approaching a Bona Fide Guru 33

transcendental to material understanding. If one actually wants to understand spiritual life and spiritual knowledge, one has to approach a guru.
The word guru means “heavy,” heavy with knowledge. And what is that
knowledge? Tad-vijfidna. That heaviness is brahma-nistha —attachment
to Brahman and to Parabrahman, Bhagavan. That is the guru’s qualifcation. Brahmany upasamdsrayam. According to Mundaka Upanisad
(1.2.12), tad-vijidnartham sa gurum evabhigacchet: **In order to understand that transcendental science, one must approach a bona fide
spiritual master.” Similarly, as stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.3.21):

tasmad gurum prapadyeta
Jyfidsuh sreya uttamam

‘Any person who seriously desires to achieve real happiness must seek
out a bona fide spiritual master and take shelter of him by initiation.’
The Upanisads inform us that the guru is one who has received
knowledge by hearing the Vedas. Srotriyari brahma-nistham. The Vedas
are called sruti, and the bona fide guru is in the line of hearing from the
disciplic succession. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.2), evar paramparapraptam. A bona fide guru does not impart some self-styled, concocted
knowledge; his knowledge is standard and received from the parampara
system. He is also firmly fixed in the service of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead (brahma-nistham). These are his two qualifications: he must
have heard the Vedic knowledge through the disciplic succession, and he
must be established in service to the Supreme Lord. He does not have to
be a very learned scholar, but he must have heard from the proper
authority. God gives us the ears to hear, and simply by hearing we may
become great preachers. We don’t need Ph.D.’s or academic examinations. One may even remain in his position; no changes are necessary.
For this purpose there is the varndsrama-dharma, composed of four
varnas and four dasramas. Unless society is divided into these eight
categories, it is simply an animal civilization. There must be some
systematized, regulated arrangement. For instance, there are different
divisions for the body: the head, the arms, the belly and the legs. Without the four corresponding divisions, no society can be conducted very
well. There will simply be chaos. The words sthdne sthitah mean
‘‘remaining in the varndsrama-dharma.” Even a Sidra can understand
34, Teachings of Lord Kapila

what is Brahman, and in that case he becomes a brdhmana automatically.
It is necessary that one hear attentively. That is all.

It is stated that Vidura heard from Maitreya Rsi, and that Maitreya Rsi
was very pleased. Unless one satishes his guru, one cannot receive proper
knowledge. That is quite natural. If one receives his guru properly and
seats him comfortably, and if the guru is pleased with one’s behavior, the
guru can speak very frankly and freely, and this will be very beneficial
to the student. By going to a spiritual master and asking for his instructions and then not following them, one simply wastes his time. Nor
should one approach the spiritual master with a challenging spirit, but
should go with the aim of rendering service. The word nipat means
“to fall down,”’ and pra means “without reservation.’ Transcendental
knowledge is based on pranipata. Therefore Krsna says: sarva-dharman
parityayya mam ekam Saranam vraja. “Just surrender unto Me.” Just as
we surrender unto Krsna, we have to surrender unto His representative,
the spiritual master. The guru is Krsna’s external representative, and the
internal guru is Krsna Himself situated in everyone’s heart. It is not that
Krsna is simply in Vaikuntha or Goloka Vrndavana. He is everywhere;
He is even within the atom. Goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhitah
(Bs. 5.37). That is the definition of Paramatma, the Supersoul. I am
dtm4, a spiritual soul, and you are dtmd. We are all situated locally, you
within your bedy and | within mine, but the Paramatma is situated.
everywhere. That is the difference between adtmd and Paramatma. Those
who are mistaken say that there is no difference between them, but there
is a difference. They are one in the sense that both are cognizant and
both are living entities (nityo nityandm cetanas cetandnam), but they
are different quantitatively. Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita (13.3):

ksetrajniam capi mam viddhi
sarva-ksetresu bhdrata

‘‘O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in
all bodies.’ Ksetrajfia is the proprietor of the ksetra (the body). The individual soul is actually not the proprietor but the occupant. In a house,
there is a tenant and a landlord. The tenant is the occupant, and the landlord is the proprietor. Similarly, the dima is simply the occupant of the
body; the proprietor is Paramatma. When the landlord tells the tenant to
Approaching a Bona Fide Guru 35

leave the house, the tenant must do so. Similarly, when the Paramatma
says that we have to leave the body, we have to do so.

To receive this Vedic knowledge, we must approach the proper guru.
The guru’s qualification is given in every sastra. In Srimad-Bhagavatam

(11.3.21) it is said:

tasmad gurum prapadyeta
Jyfidsuh sreya uttamam

One should not accept a guru unless one is inquisitive to know the ultimate goal of life. An ordinary man interested in bodily comforts does not
need a guru. Unfortunately, at the present moment, the word guru refers
to someone who can give bodily medicine. One approaches a Mahatmaji
and says, “I am suffering from this disease. Please help me.’’ And the
Mahatmaji says, “Yes, | have a mantra that will heal you and give you
success. Give me a little money and take it.” This is not a real guru. One
should approach a guru to learn about tattva, the Absolute Truth. One
should not search out a guru to cure some material disease; rather, one
requires a doctor. Similarly, people think that if a person can make him
successful in business, that person is a guru. The Sastras do not confirm
this either. A guru is one who knows the Vedas and the Vedic conclusion.
The Vedic conclusion is the understanding of Krsna. Vedais ca sarvair
aham eva vedyah: “By all the Vedas, I am to be known.” (Bg. 15.15)
It is not that we have to understand Krsna fully. That is not possible.
We have no capacity to understand the unlimited. Advaitam acyutam
anddim ananta-riipam (Bs. 5.33). With our limited knowledge we cannot understand the unlimited; indeed, even Krsna does not understand
Himself. His attraction is unlimited, and to understand why He is so attractive, He became Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and took on the ecstatic
emotions of Srimati Radharani (radha-bhava-dyuti). If Krsna cannot
comprehend the limit of His own attraction and bliss, it is certainly not
possible for us with our limited knowledge. If we can simply understand
Krsna in part, that is our perfection. Therefore Krsna says: janma karma
ca me divyam evam yo vetti tattvatah. If we misunderstand Krsna and
take Him to be a human being like us, we become midhas, fools. Krsna’s
body is not composed of material elements like ours, and if we think this
way, we are mistaken. The material nature belongs to Krsna, and He is
36 Teachings of Lord Kapila

its controller. We are under the control of material nature, and that is the
difference.

One who has real knowledge knows that prakrti, material nature, is
working under Krsna’s direction. It is not possible to understand how all
this is going on, but we can understand it in summary. Janmddy asya
yato ‘nvaydd itaratas ca: everything emanates from the Supreme Absolute Truth, Krsna. This much knowledge is sufficient. We can then increase this knowledge to understand just how material nature is working
under Krsna’s direction. Modern scientists mistakenly think that
material nature is working independently and that things evolve by some
chemical process only. However, life does not merely come from life or
some chemical evolution. As Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita (10.8):

aham sarvasya prabhavo
mattah sarvam pravartate

“IT am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from Me.” The same conclusion is also given in Veddnta-sitra,
wherein it is stated, janmddy asya yatah: “‘Brahman is He from whom
everything emanates.” “Everything” includes living entities and inert
matter. Both matter and the living entities come from Krsna. Indeed,
the whole world is a combination of matter and spirit, prakrti and the liv
ing entity. /

Material energy is inferior, and spiritual energy is superior. Why?
Superior energy (jiva-bhita), the living entity, is controlling material
nature. Actually he is not controlling, but is trying to utilize it. For instance, human beings are advanced living entities, and they have created
modern civilization by utilizing dull, inert matter. This is our
superiority. However, we are also prakrti as well as pard prakrti. In this
way, we have to understand tattva-jidna.

Srimad-Bhagavatam is a commentary on Veddnta-siitra. Vedantasutra explains that the Supreme is the source of everything, and the
nature of that source is explained in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.1.1): Janmaddy asya yato ‘nvaydad itaratas carthesv abhijiiah svarat. That source is
abhifia, cognizant. Matter is not cognizant; therefore the theory of
modern science that life comes from matter is incorrect. The identity
Approaching a Bona Fide Guru 37

from whom everything emanates is abhijiia, cognizant, which means He
can understand. The Bhdgavatam (1.1.1) also states, tene brahma hrda
ya Gdi-kavaye: Krsna instructed Lord Brahma in Vedic knowledge.
Unless the ultimate source is a living entity, how can He impart
knowledge? Srimad-Bhagavatam was compiled by Vyasadeva, who also
compiled the Vedanta-sitra. Generally the Mayavadis emphasize the
commentary made on the Vedanta-sitra by Sankaracarya, the Sarirakabhasya, but that is not the original commentary on Veddnta-sitra. The
original commentary is given by the author himself, Vyasadeva, i in the
form of Srimad-Bhagavatam. To understand the actual meaning of the
Vedanta-sitra, we must refer to the commentary made by the author

himself. As stated by Sri Krsna Himself in Bhagavad-gita (13.5):

rsibhir bahudha gitam
chandobhir vividhaih prthak

brahma-sitra-padais caiva
hetumadbhir viniscitaih

‘The knowledge of the field of activities and of the knower of activities
is described by various sages in various Vedic writings—especially in the
Veddanta-sitra—and is presented with all reasoning as to cause and
effect.”

Transcendental knowledge is therefore very logical. According to the
Vedic system, the dcdrya must understand Veddnta-sitra (also called
Brahma-sitra) before he can be accepted as an dcdrya. Both the
Mayavada-sampradaya and the Vaisnava-sampradaya have explained the
Veddanta-siitra. Without understanding Veddnta-sitra, one cannot understand Brahman. It is said that Vidura understood transcendental
knowledge from Maitreya, and it is stated that Maitreya is a friend of
Vyasadeva’s. This means that both Vidura and Maitreya know what
Vyasadeva knows. We have to approach a spiritual master who is in the
disciplic succession from Vydsadeva. Everyone may claim to be following
Vyasadeva, but one must actually follow him. Vyasadeva accepted Krsna
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Arjuna also accepted Krsna
as Parabrahman, the Supreme Person. One may say that because Arjuna
was a friend of Krsna’s, he accepted Him in this way, but this is not the
case. Arjuna gave evidence that Vydsadeva also accepted Krsna.
38 Teachings of Lord Kapila

param brahma param dhama
pavitram paramam bhavan

purusam sdsvatam divyam
ddi-devam ajam vibhum

dhus tvdm rsayah sarve
devarsir ndradas tatha

asito devalo vydsah
svayam caiva bravisi me

‘Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme
abode and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person.
You are the primal God, transcendental and original, and You are the unborn and all-pervading beauty. All the great sages such as Narada, Asita,
Devala and Vyasa proclaim this of You, and now You Yourself are declaring it to me.” (Bg. 10.12—13)

Vyasadeva accepted Krsna as param brahma, and Vydsadeva began
his commentary on Veddnta-siitra with the words om namo bhagavate
vasudevaya. If we are actually interested in understanding, we must approach a representative of Vyadsadeva like Maitreya. Maitreya is also addressed as bhagavan, although of course the Supreme Bhagavan is Krsna
Himself (krsnas tu bhagavan svayam). But the word bhagavan also
refers to other powerful persons like Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, Vyasadeva
or Maitreya. The actual Bhagavan is Krsna Himself, but these great personalities have attained as much knowledge of Krsna as possible. It is not
possible to have cent per cent knowledge of Krsna. Not even Narayana
Himself is capable of that. Yet those who follow Krsna’s instructions fully
are sometimes called Bhagavan. There are many artificial Bhagavan’s,
but a real Bhagavan is one who knows what Krsna has taught. Vidura
was very eager to receive transcendental knowledge, and because of this,
Maitreya was very pleased with him. One can please the spiritual master
simply by surrendering to him and rendering service, saying, “Sir, | am
your most obedient servant. Please accept me and give me instructions. ”’
Although Arjuna was a very intimate friend of Krsna’s, before receiving
Srimad Bhagavad-gité he surrendered himself, saying, sisyas te *harh
Sddhi mam tvaém prapannam: “‘Now I am Your disciple and a soul surrendered unto You. Please instruct me.”’ (Bg. 2.7)
Approaching a Bona Fide Guru 39

This is the proper way to ask for knowledge. One does not approach
the spiritual master with a challenging spirit. One should also be inquisitive to understand the spiritual science. It is not that one considers himself superior to the guru. One must first find a guru to whom one can
surrender, and if this is not possible, one shouldn’t waste his time. By
surrendering to the proper person, one can very quickly come to understand transcendental knowledge.
CHAPTER FIVE

Lord Kapila Takes Charge
of His Mother, Devahiti

TEXT 5

maitreya uvdca
pitari prasthite ’ranyam
matuh priya-cikirsaya
tasmin bindusare ’vatsid

bhagavan kapilah kila

TRANSLATION

Maitreya said: When Kardama left for the forest, Lord Kapila
stayed on the strand of the Bindu-sarovara to please His mother,
Devahiti.

PURPORT

In the absence of the father it is the duty of the grown son to take
charge of his mother and serve her to the best of his ability so that she
will not feel separation from her husband. It is also the duty of the husband to leave home as soon as there is a grown son to take charge of his
wife and family affairs. That is the Vedic system of household life. One
should not remain continually implicated in household affairs up to the
time of death. He must leave. Family affairs and the wife may be taken
charge of by a grown son.

Being a great yogi, Kardama Muni was not very interested in family
life. Nonetheless, he decided to marry, and Svayambhuva Manu brought
his daughter Devahiti to him to serve as a wife. Kardama Muni was a
yogi living in a cottage, and Devahiti was a princess, a king’s daughter.
Not being used to work, she became very skinny, and Kardama Muni
took compassion upon her, thinking, “This girl has come to me, but now

Al
42 Teachings of Lord Kapila

she is not in a very comfortable position.”’ Therefore by his yogic powers,
Kardama Muni created a large palace with many servants, gardens and
other opulences. Not only that, but he also created a great spaceship as
large as a small city. Modern airlines have prepared a 747, and although
these are very big, Kardama Muni, by his yogic powers, was able to create a spaceship wherein there were lakes, palaces and gardens. This
spaceship could also travel all over the universe. Modern scientists labor
very hard to make a small spaceship to go to the moon, but Kardama
Muni could create a great spaceship that could travel to all planets. This
is possible by yogic powers.

There are different siddhis, or yogic perfections—animd, lagima,
prapti, and so on—and whatever yogis choose to do, they can do. That is
the real yoga system. It is not that one becomes a yogi simply by pressing
his nose and performing some gymnastics. One must actually attain the
yogic siddhis. By these siddhis, the yogi can become very small or very
large, very heavy or very light. Whatever he wants, he can immediately
produce in his hand, and he can travel wherever he desires. Kardama
Muni was such a perfected siddhi-yogi. By his wife, Devahiti, he had
nine daughters, who were distributed to the Prajapatis hke Daksa
Maharaja and many others. The only son of Kardama Muni was
Kapiladeva, an incarnation of Krsna. This Kapiladeva was one of the
mahajanas. The word mahdjana means “‘authority,’’ and according to
the Vedic Sdstras there are twelve authorities. These are Svayambha,
Narada, Sambhu, Kumara, Kapila, Manu, Prahlada, Janaka, Bhisma,
Bali, Sukadeva Gosvami and Yamaradja. Svayambhi is Brahma, and
Sambhu is Lord Siva. These authorities should be followed if we want to
approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead and understand the purpose of religious life. Mahajano yena gatah sa panthah. These mahajanas follow the principles set forth by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, in Bhagavad-gita.

We cannot very easily understand the actual truth of religious
systems, but if we follow these mahdjanas, we can understand. Kapila
Muni explained the glories of devotional service to His mother,
Devahiti. If we follow Him, we may learn the truth of devotional service. According to the system of varndsrama-dharma, one who is over
fifty years of age must leave home, go to the forest and completely devote
his life to spiritual realization. This is the actual varndsrama-dharma
Lord Kapila Takes Charge of His Mother, Devahiti 43

system. It is not a Hindu system, for the word “‘Hindu” is a name given
by the Muslims and does not occur in any Vedic literature. However, the
varndsrama-dharma is mentioned. Civilized human beings should
strictly follow the varndsrama institution. If one is born a brahmana, he
is trained nicely as a brahmacari, and then he becomes a grhastha, a
householder. When he gives up his home, he is called a vdnaprastha, and
after that he may take sannydsa. Being a yogi, Kardama Muni strictly
followed these principles; therefore as soon as Kapiladeva was grown,
Devahiti was placed in His charge. Kardama Muni then left home. As
stated in this verse: pitari prasthite ’ranyam matuh priya-cikirsayd.

According to the Manu-samhitd, a woman should never be given
freedom. When she is not under the protection of her husband, she must
be under the protection of her sons. Women cannot properly utilize
freedom, and it is better for them to remain dependent. A woman cannot
be happy if she is independent. That is a fact. In Western countries we
have seen many women very unhappy simply for the sake of independence. That independence is not recommended by the Vedic civilization
or by the varnasrama-dharma. Consequently Devahiti was given to her
grown son, Kapiladeva, and Kapiladeva was fully aware that He had to
take care of His mother. It is the duty of the father to protect his
daughter until she attains puberty and is married to a suitable young
man. The husband then takes care of the wife. Generally a man should
marry at around twenty-five years of age, and a girl should marry no
later than sixteen. If this is the case, when the man is fifty years old, his
eldest son should be around twenty-five, old enough to take charge of the
mother. According to this calculation, Kapiladeva was about twenty-five
years old and was quite able to take charge of His mother, Devahiti. He
knew that because His father left His mother in His charge, He should
take care of her and always please her. Matuh priya-cikirsayd.
Kapiladeva was not irresponsible, but was always ready to please His
mother. Kapiladeva was a brahmacdri, and His mother took lessons from
Him. That is the prerogative of the male. As stated in Bhagavad-gitd
(9.32):

mam hi pdartha vyapasritya
ye ‘pi syuh pdpa-yonayah
striyo vaisyds tatha sidrds
te ‘pi ydnti param gatim
4.4, Teachings of Lord Kapila

‘‘O son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth—women, vaisyas [merchants] as well as sadras [workers] —can
approach the supreme destination.’’ Women are considered on the same
platform with sidras, and although a woman may be married to a
brdhmana, she is not given the sacred thread. It is also said that the
Mahabharata was compiled by Vyasadeva because the direct Vedic
knowledge could not be understood by women, Sidras and dvijabandhus, those who are born in brdhmana families but are not qualified brdhmanas. Stri-sidra-dvijabandhiinam trayi na_ Sruti-gocard
(Bhag. 1.4.25). Consequently Mahabharata is called the fifth Veda. The
four preceding Vedas are the Sdma, Yajur, Rg and Atharva. The essence
of Vedic knowledge, Bhagavad-gitd, is given within the Mahabharata.
Women are inferior to men, and Vedic civilization is so perfect that men
are given full charge of the women. It is therefore said: mdtuh priyacikirsayd. The son is always ready to see that the mother is not unhappy.
Kapiladeva was anxious that His mother not feel the absence of His
father, and He was ready to take the best care of her and give her knowledge. Because women are supposed to be less intelligent, they should be
given knowledge, and they should also follow this knowledge. They
should follow their father’s instructions, their husband’s instructions
and the instructions of their grown, scholarly sons like Kapiladeva. In
this way, their lives can be perfect. In all cases, women should always
remain dependent.

Tasmin bindusare ’vatsid bhagavan kapilah kila. It is noteworthy that
in this verse Kapiladeva is referred to as Bhagavan, which indicates that
He possesses all wealth, fame, knowledge, beauty, strength and renunciation. These six opulences are fully represented in Krsna; therefore
Krsna is accepted as the Supreme Personality of Godhead (krsnas tu
bhagavan svayam), and others are accepted as His expansions, or incarnations (visnu-tattva). In Bhakti-rasdmrta-sindhu, Ripa Gosvami has
analyzed the characteristics of Bhagavan. The first Bhagavan is Sri Krsna
Himself, but some of His opulences are also bestowed upon Lord
Brahma. Lord Brahma is a jiva-tattva, a living being like us. If we become spiritually powerful, we can also have the post of Lord Brahma.
Superior to Lord Brahma is Lord Siva, and superior to Lord Siva is
Visnu, or Lord Narayana, and superior to all is Krsna. That is the
analysis of the Vedic sdstras and Brahma-samhita. Even Sankaracarya,
Lord Kapila Takes Charge of His Mother, Devahiti 45

the Mayavadi impersonalist philosopher, accepts Krsna as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead (sa bhagavan svayam krsnah). All the Gcdéryas—
Ramanujacarya, Madhvacarya, Visnusvami, Nimbarka and Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu—also accept Krsna as the Supreme Lord.

Kapiladeva is an incarnation of Krsna, and He gave instructions to His
mother, Devahiti. We must distinguish between the two Kapilas. One
Kapila is this Bhagavan Kapila, and the other Kapila is the atheist Kapila.
Bhagavan Kapila is also known as Devahiti-putra Kapila. Both Kapilas
expounded Sankhya philosophy, but the atheist Kapila expounded it
without understanding, perception or realization of God. On the bank of
the Bindu-sarovara Lake, Kapiladeva personally expounded Sankhya
philosophy to His mother, Devahiti, just as Krsna personally expounded
the knowledge of Bhagavad-gita to His friend Arjuna. Like Arjuna,
Devahiti was aware that she was before her spiritual master, as indicated
in the following verse. Indeed, Lord Brahma had informed her that her
son was a powerful incarnation.

TEXT 6

tam dsinam akarmaénam
tattva-mdrgdgra-darsanam

sva-sutam devahity dha
dhatuh samsmarati vacah

TRANSLATION
When Kapila, who could show her the ultimate goal of the Ab
solute Truth, was sitting leisurely before her, Devahiti remembered the words Brahma had spoken to her, and she therefore
began to question Kapila as follows.

PURPORT

The ultimate goal of the Absolute Truth is Krsna consciousness, devotional service. The liberated stage is not final. If we simply understand
that we are not the body, that we are spirit soul, our knowledge is insufhcient. We must also act as Brahman; then our position will be fixed.
 

46 Teachings of Lord Kapila

brahma-bhitah prasannétma
na Socati na kanksati
samah sarvesu bhitesu

mad-bhaktim labhate pardém

‘One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have
anything; he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional service unto Me.” (Bg. 18.54) Bhakti is obtainable
for a liberated person; it is not for the conditioned soul. How is this

possible? In Bhagavad-gita (14.26) Krsna says:

mam ca yo ’vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan

brahma-bhiydaya kalpate

“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and
thus comes to the level of Brahman.”

We must engage in the nine processes of devotional service, the first of
which is hearing (Sravana). Then, under the direction of the spiritual
master and the Sdstras, one can immediately become a liberated person.
One doesn’t have to endeavor separately to become liberated if he immediately engages in devotional service. One must have a firm conviction
that he is engaged in Krsna’s service and is free from all material contamination. This is imperative. The words tattva-mdrga-darsanam are
elucidated elsewhere in Srimad-Bhdgavatam: brahmeti paramatmeti
bhagavan iti sabdyate. The Absolute Truth is understood differently according to the position of the student. Some understand the Absolute
Truth as impersonal Brahman, some as localized Paramatma, and others
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, or Visnu. Brahman,
Paramatma and Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are not
different. They are simply different aspects of the complete Godhead.
Looking at a mountain from a distance, we may see a hazy cloud, and if
we come nearer, we may see something green. If we actually climb the
mountain, we will find many houses, trees and animals. Our vision is of
Lord Kapila Takes Charge of His Mother, Devahiti 47

the same mountain, but due to our different positions we see haze, greenery or variegatedness. In the final stage, there are varieties—trees,
animals, men, houses, and so on. The Absolute Truth is not without
variety. Just as there is material variety, there is spiritual variety. Because the Mayavadi philosophers are seeing the Absolute Truth from a
distance, they think that the Absolute Truth has no variety. They consider variety to be material, but this is a misunderstanding. The Absolute
Truth is described as variegated in Brahma-samhita (5.29):

cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vrksalaksdurtesu surabhir abhipdlayantam

laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-sevyamadnam
govindam ddi-purusam tam aham bhajémi

‘‘T worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor, who is tending the cows, fulfilling all desires, in abodes built with spiritual gems and
surrounded by millions of desire trees. He is always served with great
reverence and affection by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of
fortune.”

There are Vaikuntha planets in the spiritual world, and there are
devotees who are all liberated. These devotees are aksara, which means
they do not fall down into the material world. They remain in the spiritual world of the Vaikunthas. They are also persons like us, but they are
eternal persons, complete with full knowledge and bliss. That is the difference between them and us. That is tattva-jfidna. Unless we understand the variegatedness of the Absolute Truth, there is a chance that we
will fall down. It is not sufficient simply to stick to the indefinite, impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth:

druhya krcchrena param padam tatah
patanty adho ‘nddrta-yusmad-anghrayah
(Bhag. 10.2.32)

Because the impersonalists are not allowed to enter the Vaikuntha planets, they simply remain in the Brahman effulgence. Thus they fall down
again into material variety. We have seen many impersonalist sannydsis
who first of all give up the world as false (Brahma satyam jagan
 

48 Teachings of Lord Kapila

mithya). They consider themselves Brahman (aham brahmasmi), consider the world false (jagat is mithya), and, having nothing more to do
with the material world, finally say, “I have become Narayana.” Then
they come to the stage of daridra-ndrdyana (poor Narayana). They become Narayana, but for want of anything better to do, for want of
variegatedness, they take up material humanitarian activities. Although
they consider their wives mithya (false), they return. ““You have already
left. Why do you come back again?”’ the wives ask. This means that these
so-called sannydsis have nothing to do. They undergo serious penances
and austerities to reach the platform of impersonal Brahman, but because there is no pleasure there, they again descend to enjoy material
variety.

We may build a nice spaceship and send it off into space, and the
astronauts may go up there and fly in the impersonal sky, but eventually
they will become tired and pray to God, “‘Please let us return to land.”
We have read that the Russian astronauts were simply missing Moscow
while they were traveling in space. This impersonal traveling is actually
very agitating; similarly, impersonal realization of the Absolute Truth
cannot be permanent because one wants variety. A falldown is inevitable.
When one gentleman read my book Easy Journey to Other Planets, he
became very enthusiastic about going to other planets. “Oh, yes,”’ I said,
“we can go with this book.” “*Yes,”’ the gentleman said, “‘then I shall
come back.” ““Why return? You should remain there.” “No, no,” he
said. “I don’t want to remain. | just want to go and come back.” This is
the “enjoying” mentality. Without variety, we cannot enjoy. Variety is
the mother of enjoyment, and Brahman realization or Paramatma
realization does not give us steady dnanda, bliss. We want dnanda.
Anandamayo ’bhydsat. The living entities are Brahman; Krsna is
Parabrahman. Krsna is enjoying perpetual adnanda, and, being part and
parcel of Krsna, we also want dnanda. Ananda cannot be impersonal or
void; dnanda entails variety. No one is simply interested in drinking
milk and eating sugar, but with milk and sugar we can make a variety of
foods— perd, barfi, ksira, rabari, dahi, and so on. There are hundreds of
preparations. In any case, variety is required for enjoyment.

The last word of tattva-jfidna is to understand Krsna, who is full of
variety. Kapiladeva is tattva-mdrgdgra-darsanam. He is an incarnation
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He will explain to His
Lord Kapila Takes Charge of His Mother, Devahati 49

mother what tattva is, how one can approach the tattva-jidna, and how
one can actually enjoy tattva-jfidna. This is not simply dry speculation.
This Krsna consciousness philosophy includes spiritual variety. People
sometimes misunderstand this variety to be material, and they hanker
for nirvisesa, nirdkdra, void. However, our philosophy is not void; it is
full of variety and transcendental bliss. This will later be specifically
enunciated by Lord Kapiladeva.
CHAPTER SIX

Devahiati Desires
Transcendental Knowledge

TEXT 7

devahiitir uvdca
nirvinnad nitaram bhiimann
asad-indriya-tarsanat
yena sambhadvyamdnena
prapannandham tamah prabho

TRANSLATION

Devahiti said: I am very sick of the disturbance caused by my
material senses, for because of this sense disturbance, my Lord, I
have fallen into the abyss of ignorance.

PURPORT

Here, at the beginning of Devahiti’s questionings, the word asadindriya-tarsanat is significant. Asat means “impermanent,” “temporary,” indriya means “senses, and tarsandt refers to agitation.
Thus asad-indriya-tarsandt means “from being agitated by the temporarily manifest senses of the material body.’’ We are evolving through
different species of material bodily existence—sometimes in a human
body, sometimes in an animal body—and therefore the engagements of
our material senses are also changing. Anything which changes is called
temporary, or asat. We should know that beyond these temporary senses
are our permanent senses, which are now covered by the material body.
The permanent senses, being contaminated by matter, are not acting
properly. Devotional service, therefore, involves freeing the senses from
this contamination. When the contamination is completely removed and
the senses act in the purity of unalloyed Krsna consciousness, we have

o1
a2 Teachings of Lord Kapila

then attained sad-indriya, or eternal sense activities. Eternal sensory
activities are called devotional service, whereas temporary sensory activities are called sense gratification. Unless one becomes tired of material sense gratification, there is no opportunity to hear transcendental
messages from a person like Kapila. Devahiti expressed that she was
tired. Now that her husband had left home, she wanted to get relief by
hearing the instructions of Lord Kapila.

The Vedic literatures describe this material world as darkness. Actually it is dark, and therefore we require sunlight, moonlight and
electricity. If it were not by nature dark, why would we require so many
arrangements for artificial light? The Vedas enjoin that we should not
remain in darkness: tamasi md jyotir gama. We are instructed to go to
the light, and that light is the spiritual world, which is directly lighted by
the effulgence, or bodily rays, of Krsna. As stated in Brahma-samhita
(5.40):

yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-kotikotisv asesa-vasudhddi-vibhiti-bhinnam

tad brahma niskalam anantam asesa-bhiitam
govindam ddi-purusam tam aham bhajdmi

‘I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is endowed with great
power. The glowing effulgence of His transcendental form is the impersonal Brahman, which is absolute, complete and unlimited and which
displays the varieties of countless planets, with their different opulences,
in millions and millions of universes.”

Animals have no ability to know that they are in darkness, but human
beings can know. Like Devahiti, an intelligent person should become
disgusted with the darkness of ignorance. Na hanyate hanyamdne
Sarire. As stated in Bhagavad-gitd (2.20), there is neither birth nor
death for the soul. The soul is not destroyed when the body is annihilated. The soul puts bodies on and takes them off like clothes. This simple knowledge is instructed in the beginning of Bhagavad-gitd, yet there
are many big scholars and leaders who still cannot understand that the
body is different from the person. This is because they do not study
Bhagavad-gitd in the proper way. Consequently no one is fully aware or
convinced that the real person is not the body. This is called darkness,
and when one is disgusted with this darkness, human life begins.
Devahiti Desires Transcendental Knowledge o3

One who has become disgusted with material existence needs the instructions of a guru. Tasmdd gurum prapadyeta jijfidsuh sreya uttamam.
Being the wife of a great yogi, Devahiti understood her constitutional
position; therefore she is placing her problem before her son,
Kapiladeva, an incarnation of God. Although Kapiladeva is her son,
Devahiti does not hesitate to take instructions from Him. She does not
say, ‘Oh, He is my son. What can He tell me? I am His mother, and I
shall instruct Him.” Instruction has to be taken from one who is in
knowledge. It doesn’t matter what his position is, whether he is a son, a
boy, a Sidra, brahmana, sannyasi or grhastha. One should simply learn
from one who knows. That is Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s instruction. Although Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself was a brahmana and a sannydasi,
He took instructions from Ramananda Raya, who was a Sidra and
grhastha but nonetheless, very exalted spiritually. When Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw that Ramananda Raya was hesitant to give instructions, the
Lord said, ‘‘Why are you hesitating? Although you are a grhastha and
are born in a Stidra family, I am prepared to take lessons from you.”

kibé viprd, kibé nydsi, Sidra kene naya
yet krsna-tattva-vettd, sei ‘guru’ haya

(Cc. Madhya 8.128)

This is Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s teaching. Whoever is qualified in Krsna
consciousness can become a guru. His family or material identity does not
matter. He simply must know the science. When we consult an engineer,
a doctor or a lawyer, we do not ask whether he is a brahmana or a Sidra.
If he is qualified, he can help with a particular subject. Similarly, if one
knows the science of Krsna, he can be a guru. Devahiti was taking
lessons from her son because He knew the science of Krsna. Even if gold
is ina filthy place, we should take it. It is also stated in the Vedas that if a
girl is highly qualified or beautiful, she can be accepted in marriage even
though born in a lower family. Thus it is not birth that is important, but
qualification. Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted everyone in India to know
the science of Krsna and preach Krsna consciousness. This is very simple. We need only repeat what Krsna has said or what has been said about
Krsna in the Vedic literatures.

Human society cannot be happy without Krsna consciousness. Krsna is
a4. Teachings of Lord Kapila

the supreme enjoyer, and we are His servants. The master is enjoying,
and the servants are helping the master enjoy. We living entities are
eternal servants of God, and our duty is to help our master enjoy. Srimati
Radharani is the topmost servant of Krsna, and Her business is always to
keep Krsna pleased. Krsna is very fond of Radharani because She renders the best service. Her sixty-four qualifications are mentioned in the
Vedic literatures. Unfortunately, in the material world we are busy trying to enjoy our material senses. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (3.42):

indriyani paradny dhur
indriyebhyah param manah
manasas tu para buddhir
yo buddheh paratas tu sah

‘The working senses are superior to dull matter; mind is higher than the
senses; intelligence is still higher than the mind; and he (the soul) is
even higher than the intelligence.” The soul is on the spiritual platform.
On the material platform, we are interested in gratifying our senses. In
this way we become implicated in the laws of nature. As stated in the
Sdstras:
ninam pramattah kurute vikarma
yad indriya-pritaya Gprnoti
na sddhu manye yata Gtmano ’yam
asann api klesada dsa dehah

‘“When a person considers sense gratification the aim of life, he certainly
becomes mad after materialistic living and engages in all kinds of sinful
activity. He does not know that due to his past misdeeds he has already
received a body which, although temporary, is the cause of his misery.
Actually the living entity should not have taken on a material body, but
he has been awarded the material body for sense gratification. Therefore
I think it not befitting an intelligent man to involve himself again in the
activities of sense gratification by which he perpetually gets material
bodies one after another.” (Bhag. 5.5.4)

Living entities in this material world are very busy trying to gratify
their senses. In the street we see many dogs assembled for sex. This may
seem very crude, but human beings are engaged in the same business,
Devahiti Desires Transcendental Knowledge 39

perhaps in a more elaborate way. We should know that sense gratification
is meant for animals, and that sense control is for human beings. By
tapasya, penance, we can purify ourselves and regain our eternal life.

Actually our material senses are not our real senses. They are covered,
just as the body is covered by clothes. Our real body is within the material body. Dehino ’smin yatha dehe. The spiritual body is within the
material body. The material body is changing, going through childhood,
youth, then old age, and then it vanishes. Although this is not our real
body, we are engaged in sense gratification with it. However, for our own
ultimate happiness, we should try to purify our senses. There is no question of destroying the senses or becoming desireless. Desire is a material
activity, and becoming desireless is not possible. The senses must be
purified in order for us to act through them transcendentally. Bhaktiyoga does not require us to destroy our senses, but to purify them. When
the senses are purified, we can serve Krsna:

sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam
tat-paratvena nirmalam

hrsikena hrsikesasevanam bhaktir ucyate

“Bhakti, or devotional service, means engaging all our senses in the service of the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all
the senses. When the spirit soul renders service unto the Supreme, there
are two side effects. One is freed from all material designations, and,
simply by being employed in the service of the Lord, one’s senses are
purified.” (Narada-paricaratra)

We can serve Hrsikesa, the master of the senses, through the senses.
We are part and parcel of Krsna, just as the hand is part and parcel of the
body. Similarly, our senses are also part and parcel of the spiritual body
of Krsna. When we purify our senses, we can act in our original constitutional position and serve Krsna. When we forget our position and try to
satisfy ourselves, we become conditioned materially. When we forget
that our duty is to serve Krsna, we fall into the material world and become implicated in personal sense gratification. As long as we continue
trying to satisfy our own senses, we have to accept another body. Krsna is
so kind that if we want to become tigers, He will give us a tiger body. If
36 Teachings of Lord Kapila

we want to become devotees, He will give us the body of a devotee. This
life is a preparation for the next, and if we want to enjoy our transcendental senses, we have to purify ourselves to return home, back to
Godhead. For this purpose, Devahiti is submitting to her son just as a
disciple submits to his master.

TEXT 8

tasya tvam tamaso ’ndhasya
duspdrasyadya padragam

sac-caksur janmanam ante
labdham me tvad-anugrahat

TRANSLATION

Your Lordship is my only means of getting out of this darkest
region of ignorance because You are my transcendental eye,
which, by Your mercy only, I have attained after many, many
births.

PURPORT

This verse is very instructive, since it indicates the relationship between the spiritual master and the disciple. The disciple or conditioned
soul is put into this darkest region of ignorance and therefore is entangled in the material existence of sense gratification. It is very difficult
to get out of this entanglement and attain freedom, but if one is fortunate
enough to get the association of a spiritual master like Kapila Muni or His
representative, then by his grace one can be delivered from the mire of
ignorance. The spiritual master is therefore worshiped as one who
delivers the disciple from the mire of ignorance with the light of the
torch of knowledge. The word pdragam is very significant. Paragam
refers to one who can take the disciple to the other side. This side is conditioned life; the other side is the life of freedom. The spiritual master
takes the disciple to the other side by opening his eyes with knowledge.
We are suffering simply because of ignorance. By the instruction of the
spiritual master, the darkness of ignorance is removed, and thus the disciple is enabled to go to the side of freedom. It is stated in Bhagavad-gitd
that after many, many births one surrenders to the Supreme Personality
Devahiti Desires Transcendental Knowledge 37

of Godhead. Similarly, if, after many, many births, one is able to find a
bona fide spiritual master and surrender to such a bona fide representative of Krsna, he can be taken to the side of light.

The bona fide spiritual master is a true Vedantist, for he actually
knows Vedanta and the Vedas and understands the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Krsna. The word veda means “‘knowledge,”’ and anta means
“last phase.”’ There are different types of knowledge. We are interested
in ordinary knowledge for economic benefit, but that is not actual knowledge. That is the art of livelihood. One may study to be an electrician and
earn his livelihood by repairing electric lines. This kind of knowledge is
called silpa-jfidna. Real knowledge, however, is Vedic knowledge, knowing oneself, what one is and what God is and understanding one’s relationship with God, and one’s duty.

One who is searching after knowledge is called jidnavan. Knowledge
begins with the inquiry athato brahma-jijfidsad: “What is Brahman?”
Knowledge also begins by understanding the threefold miseries of the
material world—ddhydtmika, ddhibhautika and ddhidaivika. We are
suffering from miseries caused by other living entities and acts of nature
as well as from miseries arising from the body and mind themselves. The
soul is aloof from the body and mind, but he suffers due to material contamination. We have no control over these threefold miseries. They are
controlled by Krsna’s maidservant, goddess Durgai, who is material
nature. She is not independent of Krsna. However, she is so powerful
that she can create and maintain. Prakrti, nature, can be very unkind.
Mother Durga is often portrayed as chastising demons by piercing them
with a trident.

Those who are learned and intelligent look to the mercy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead for relief from the threefold miseries of
material existence. Although this material world is nothing but darkness,
people are very proud of their eyes. They are always saying, “Can you
show me God?”’ The answer to that is: “Have you the eyes to see God?”
Why is the emphasis placed on seeing? Certainly, God can be seen, as
stated in Brahma-samhita (5.38), premdiyjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena: “Govinda [Krsna] is always seen by the devotee whose eyes are
anointed by the pulp of love.”

If we are devotees, lovers of God, the ointment of love will clear our
eyes. In order to see God, we have to cleanse our eyes by wiping away the
28 Teachings of Lord Kapila

cataracts of material contamination. Although we may be eager to see
God, we cannot see Him with these material eyes. Not only can we not see
Him, but we cannot understand Him, although His name is there. Understanding God means first of all understanding His name. Therefore from
the beginning we should chant the Hare Krsna mahd-mantra. God is not
different from His name. Krsna’s name and Krsna’s person are the same.
‘*Absolute’”’ means that Krsna’s name, form, place, dress, pastimes and
everything are nondifferent from Him. Krsna is present in His name, but
because we have no love for Him, we cannot see Him.

Sandtana Gosvami was a great learned scholar, and he was called a
pandita, which indicates that he was a learned bradhmana. When
Sandtana Gosvami approached Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he said, “The
people in my neighborhood are calling me a pandita, and I am very
unhappy because of this.”” Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked, ““Why are you
dissatisfied?’’ Sandtana Gosvami replied, “I am such a poor pandita that
I do not even know the goal of life. I do not even know what is beneficial
for me. I am simply being carried away by sense gratification.” In this
way, Sandtana Gosvami approached Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He did not
approach Him to get some gold or some medicine. He went to find out his
real self-interest. This is the real purpose for approaching a guru.

Devahiti approached Lord Kapiladeva in the same way. She said, ““My
dear Kapila, You have come as my son, but You are my guru because You
can inform me how I can cross the ocean of nescience, which is the material world.”’ Thus one who feels the need to cross the dark ocean of nescience, which is material existence, requires a guru. It is not the guru’s
task to supply gold and medicine. Now it has become a fashion to keep a
guru as if he were a dog or a cat. This is of no use. We must inquire about
that portion of God’s creation which is beyond this darkness. The
Upanisads and Bhagavad-gitd describe another world, beyond this material nature. According to Krsna in Bhagavad-gita (15.6):

na tad bhdsayate siryo

na Sasdrko na pdvakah
yad gatvé na nivartante

tad dhama paramam mama

“That abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by
electricity. One who reaches it never returns to this material world.”
Devahiti Desires Transcendental Knowledge 29

It is not possible for us to go to that paravyoma by material means. It
is impossible to penetrate the. material universe unless one understands
Krsna. One can be enlightened by the mercy of God because Krsna Himself comes to give us information. If He does not come personally, He
sends His devotee, or He leaves behind Him Bhagavad-gitd. However,
we are 80 foolish that we do not take advantage of them. We do not take
advantage of His devotee, who hankers to give this knowledge, sacrificing everything. Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said:

brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva
guru-krsna-prasdde pdya bhakti-lata-bija

‘The fallen, conditioned living entity, trapped by the external energy,
loiters in the material world, but if by good fortune he meets a bona fide
representative of the Lord, and if he takes advantage of such a guru, he
receives the seed of devotional service.” (Cc. Madhya 19.151)

The seed of devotional service is received by a most fortunate person.
Those who are cultivating bhakti in the International Society for Krishna
Consciousness are the most fortunate people in the world. By Krgna’s
mercy one can receive the bhakti-latd-bija, the seed of devotional service. Unless one is free from the reactions of sin, one cannot understand
bhakti or Bhagavan. Therefore we must act piously by giving up illicit
sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling. If we lead a pious life, we
can understand God. This Krsna consciousness movement is engaged in
training people to this end so that their lives will be successful.

TEXT 9

ya Gdyo bhagavan pumsdm
isvaro vai bhavan kila

lokasya tamasdndhasya
caksuh sirya woditah

TRANSLATION

You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the origin and
Supreme Lord of all living entities. You have arisen to disseminate
 

 

60 Teachings of Lord Kapila

the rays of the sun in order to dissipate the darkness of the ignorance of the universe.

PURPORT

Kapila Muni is accepted as an incarnation of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Krsna. Here the word ddya means “‘the origin of all living
entities,’ and pumsdm isvarah means “the Lord (isvara) of the living
entities” (iSvarah paramah krsnah). Kapila Muni is the direct expansion
of Krsna, who is the sun of spiritual knowledge. The sun dissipates the
darkness of the universe, and when the light of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead comes down, it at once similarly dissipates the darkness of
mayd. We have our eyes, but without the light of the sun, our eyes are of
no value. Similarly, without the light of the Supreme Lord, or without
the divine grace of the spiritual master, one cannot see things as they are.

In this verse, Devahiti also addresses her son as Bhagavan. Bhagavan
is the Supreme Person. If we could just use a little common sense we
could understand that an organization requires a leader. Without a
leader, we cannot organize anything. Foolish philosophers say that the
universe automatically came into being by nature. They say that in the
beginning there was a chunk, and this cosmic manifestation came out of
that chunk of matter. But where did this chunk come from? The fact is
that there must be a brain, a leader, behind anything organized. We have
information of this leader from the Vedas: nityo nityénam cetanas
cetandndm. The Supreme Lord is eternal, and we are also eternal. But
the Supreme Lord is one, and we are many. The Supreme Lord is very
great, and we are very small. He is all-pervading and infinite, and we are
finite and infinitesimal. Even if we analyze the creation, we will find that
not everyone is on the same level. One person is more intelligent or opulent than another. If we analyze things in this way, we will come to the
demigods, and among them we will find that the most important demigod
is Lord Brahmi. He is the original creature within this universe, yet he is
not the most intelligent being. It is said that in the beginning, Brahma
received knowledge from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Recently newspapers are reporting that faith in a personal God is
diminishing. This means that people are becoming more and more
foolish. This is natural in Kali-yuga, for as the age of Kali progresses,
bodily strength, memory and mercy diminish. We actually see that the
Devahiti Desires Transcendental Knowledge 61

present generation is not as strong as the previous. People also have short
memories. We also understand that sometimes people are killed while
other people pass by, not caring. Thus mercy is also diminishing. Because
everything is diminishing, God consciousness is diminishing also;
therefore it is natural to receive news that faith in a personal God is
diminishing. In Bhagavad-gita (7.15), one who does not accept a personal God is described as a miidha, a fool.

na mam duskrtino midhéh
prapadyante narddhamah

mayaydpahrta-jnana
dsuram bhdvam asritah

‘Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind,
whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic
nature of demons, do not surrender unto Me.”

Actually, people today do not even know the meaning of God, so there
is no question of surrender. There are also those who are scholarly and
well educated, but their knowledge is taken away by mdyé4, illusion. Although they may superficially hold degrees, they have no real knowledge. They are also asuras, demons who simply defy God, saying, “I am
God, you are God. Why are you searching for God? There are many Gods
loitering in the street. Take care of them.” Therefore it is not surprising
that newspapers report that faith in a personal God is decreasing. Nonetheless, God is a person. Ya ddyo bhagavdn. Lord Brahmi also worships
Krsna by saying, govindam ddi-purusam tam aham bhajdmi. He says, “‘I
worship that original person, Govinda.” Adi-purusam, Krsna, has no one
preceding Him; therefore He is called original. It is said that Krsna was
born of Vasudeva, but this simply means that Krsna accepted Vasudeva
as His father. Sri Krsna deals with His devotees in different relationships, or rasas—Sdnta, ddsya, sakhya, vatsalya and mddhurya.

We all have some relationship with Krsna, but presently that is
covered. Therefore we have to revive it. Simple appreciation of the
Supreme is called sdnta-rasa. When one appreciates the Supreme fully,
he wishes to render some service, and that is called dasya. When one becomes more intimate, he becomes a friend of Krsna’s, and that is called
sakhya. When one is more advanced, he wants to render service to Krsna
62 Teachings of Lord Kapila

as a father or a mother, and this is vdtsalya. Being a father or a mother
means serving the son. The Christian conception of God as the Supreme
Father is not very perfect because if we conceive of God as a father, our
position will be to take things from Him. Everyone wants to take something from the father. One is always saying, “Father, give me this.
Father, give me that.”’ However, accepting the Supreme Lord as one’s
son means rendering service. Yasodimayi got Krsna as her son, and she
was always anxious that He not be in danger. Thus she was always protecting Him. Actually Krsna protects the entire universe, but Yasoda was
giving protection to Krsna. This is Vaisnava philosophy. Yasodi became
mad when she saw Krsna taken away by the Trnavarta demon. However,
Krsna became so heavy that the demon could not fly in the sky, and thus
the demon fell to the earth and died. Yasoda immediately said, “God has
saved my Krsna!’’ She then began to thank some other God, some devatd.
She did not know that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If
she had thought of Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
relationship between mother and son would have been destroyed.
Therefore Krsna was playing just like an ordinary child, and mother
Yasoda was treating Him as her son. Krsna’s friends, the cowherd boys,
did not consider Him the Supreme Lord either. The gopis even used to
chastise Krsna. If a devotee can have such a relationship with Krsna, why
should he want to become one with God? It is better to be God’s father,
God’s controller. This is bhakti-marga, the path of devotional service. A
devotee does not want to be equal to God or one with God. He simply
wants to render service.

In order to understand the Absolute Truth, we have to understand the
meaning of Bhagavan. Devahiti was not an ordinary woman. She was the
wife of Kardama Muni, a great yogi. She had obviously learned something from her husband, for had she not been very exalted, how could
Bhagavan Kapiladeva have become her son? Everyone should know what
is Bhagavan and take lessons from Bhagavan. Lord Kapila is Bhagavan,
and He personally instructed His mother in Sankhya philosophy. By this
knowledge we can develop or awaken our dormant love for God. Then we
can see God when our eyes are anointed with love for Him. Indeed, we
can see God everywhere and at all times. We will see God and nothing
but God. We will see God not only within our hearts. If we go to the
Devahiti Desires Transcendental Knowledge 63

ocean, we will see God. If one is a little thoughtful, he will see that the
great ocean stays in its place. The ocean has received its orders not to go
beyond such and such a limit. Any intelligent man can see God while
walking down the beach. However, this requires a little intelligence.
People who are asses, midhas, duskrtis, cannot see God, but those who
are intelligent can see God everywhere because God is omnipresent. He is
within the universe and within our heart, and He is even within the
atom. Why are we saying that we cannot see Him? God says, ““Try to see
Me in this way, but if you are too dull, then try to see Me another way.”’

What is the easy way? Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita, ““I am the taste of
water.’ Is there anyone who has not tasted water? He also says, “I am
the light of the sun.” Is there anyone who has not seen sunshine? Then
why are people saying, “I have not seen God’’? First of all we have to try
to see God. It is as easy as ABCD. When we see God everywhere, we will
see the personal God. Then we will understand.

Bhagavan pumsdm isvarah. Bhagavan is isvara, the controller. We are
not independent. No one can actually say, “I am independent.” We are
bound tightly by the modes of material nature, and yet we are thinking
that we are independent. This is simply foolishness. Therefore it is said
that all the people in the material world are blinded by the darkness of
ignorance. When people are blind, out of their ignorance they say,
‘There is no God. I cannot see God.” Then God comes as Krsna or
Kapiladeva and says, “Here I am. See My features. I am a person. I play
the flute and enjoy Myself in Vrndavana. Why can’t you see Me?” Thus
God comes, explains Himself and leaves behind His instruction,
Bhagavad-gitd. Still, people are so foolish that they claim not to understand God. If we try to see God through the instructions given to
Devahiti by Lord Kapila, our lives will be successful.

TEXT 10

atha me deva sammoham
apdkrastum tvam arhasi

yo ’vagraho ’harh mametity
etasmin yojitas tvayd
64. Teachings of Lord Kapila

TRANSLATION

Now be pleased, my Lord, to dispel my great delusion. Due to
my feeling of false ego, I have been engaged by Your maya and
have identified myself with the body and consequent bodily
relations.

PURPORT

Maya is the false ego of identifying one’s body with one’s self and of
claiming things possessed in relationship with the body. In Bhagavadgitd, Fifteenth Chapter, the Lord says, “I am sitting in everyone’s heart,
and from Me comes everyone’s remembrance and forgetfulness.”
Devahiti has stated that false identification of the body with the self and
attachment for bodily possessions are also under the direction of the
Lord. Does this mean that the Lord discriminates by engaging one in His
devotional service and another in sense gratification? If that were true, it
would be an incongruity on the part of the Supreme Lord, but that is not
the actual fact. As soon as the living entity forgets his real constitutional
position of eternal servitorship to the Lord and wants instead to enjoy
himself by sense gratification, he is captured by mdyd. This capture leads
to the consciousness of false identification with the body and attachment
for the possessions of the body. These are the activities of mdyd, and
since mdyd is also an agent of the Lord, it is indirectly the action of the
Lord. The Lord is merciful; if anyone wants to forget Him and enjoy this
material world, He gives him full facility, not directly but through the
agency of His material potency. Therefore, since the material potency is
the Lord’s energy, indirectly it is the Lord who gives the facility to forget
Him. Devahiti therefore said, ““My engagement in sense gratification
was also due to You. Now kindly get me free from this entanglement.”

By the grace of the Lord one is allowed to enjoy this material world,
but when one is disgusted with material enjoyment and is frustrated, and
when one sincerely surrenders unto the lotus feet of the Lord, then the
Lord is so kind that He frees one from entanglement. Krsna says,
therefore, in Bhagavad-gitd, °*First of all surrender, and then I will take
charge of you and free you from all reactions of sinful activities.”’ Sinful
activities are those activities performed in forgetfulness of our relationship with the Lord. In this material world, activities for material enjoyment that are considered pious are also sinful. For example, one
Devahiti Desires Transcendental Knowledge 65

sometimes gives money in charity to a needy person with a view to get
back the money four times increased. Giving with the purpose of gaining
something is called charity in the mode of passion. Everything done here
is done in the modes of material nature, and therefore all activities but
service to the Lord are sinful. Because of sinful activities we become attracted by the illusion of material attachment, and we think, “I am this
body.’’ I think of the body as myself and of bodily possessions as “‘mine.”’
Devahiiti requested Lord Kapila to free her from that entanglement of
false identification and false possession.

In asking this, Devahiti is accepting her son, Kapila, as her guru. He
consequently tells her how to solve all material problems. Material life
is nothing but sex attraction. Pumsah striyd mithuni-bhadvam etam
(Bhag. 5.5.8). Material life means that men are after women and women
are after men. We find this not only in human society but in bird, dog,
cat and demigod society. As soon as people join to satisfy their sex desire,
the attraction becomes greater and greater. An apartment is needed for
privacy, and then one has to earn a livelihood and acquire some land.
Without children, married life is frustrated, and of course the children
have to be educated. Thus one becomes entangled in material life by creating so many situations, but at the time of death Krsna comes and takes
away everything—house, land, wife, children, friends, reputation and
whatever. Then we have to begin another life. It is not that we simply die
and finish everything. We are living eternally; the body is finished, but
we have to accept another body out of the 8,400,000 forms. In this way,
our life is going on, but we are thinking in terms of wife, children, and
so forth. This is all illusion.

In any case, we will not be allowed to stay here, and although we are
attached to all this, everything will be taken away at death. Whatever
post we are occupying —be it president or Lord Brahma—we are occupying temporarily. We may be here five years, ten years, one hundred
years or five million years. Whatever, our position is limited. Our position in the material world is not eternal, but we are eternal. Why, then,
should we be illusioned by the noneternal? By nature we are part and
parcel of Krsna, and Krsna is sac-cid-dnanda-vigraha. In order to transcend the darkness of material life and go to the world of light, we need
to approach a guru. It is for this reason that Devahiti is approaching
Lord Kapiladeva.
66 Teachings of Lord Kapila

In the morning, when the sun arises, the darkness of night immediately goes away. Similarly, when God or His incarnation comes, the
darkness of material life is dissipated. When Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, came, Arjuna’s illusion was dispelled. He was
thinking, ““Why should I fight with my relatives?” Actually the whole
world is going on under this conception of “‘my”’ and “‘mine.”’ There are
fights between nations, societies, communities and families. People are
thinking, ““Why are you interfering with my business?”’ Then there is a
fight. Because of illusion, we do not consider these situations temporary.
On a train, people may argue and fight over a seat, but one who knows
that he will only be on the train for two or three hours thinks, ““Why
should I fight? I shall only be here for a short while.’”’ One person thinks
in this way, and the other person is ready to fight, thinking that his seat
is permanent. No one will be allowed to stay within this material world;
everyone will have to change his body and position, and as long as one
remains here, he will have to fight and struggle for existence. This is the
way of material life. We may temporarily make some compromises, but
ultimately the material world is full of misery.

We are very much attached to this material world, but according to the
Vedic system, renunciation is compulsory, for when one reaches the age
of fifty, he renounces his family life. Nature gives warning, “‘You are
now past fifty. That’s all right. You have fought in this material world.
Now stop this business.”’ Children play on the beach and make houses
out of sand, but after a while the father comes and says, ““Now, my dear
children, time is up. Stop this business and come home.” This is the
business of the guru—to teach his disciples detachment. The world is not
our place; our place is Vaikunthaloka. Krsna also comes to remind us of
this. The dharma, or order, of the Supreme Person is to become His
devotee and always think of Him. Krsna says:

man-mané bhava mad-bhakto
mad-ydaji mam namaskuru

‘Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, offer obeisances and worship Me.” (Bg. 9.34)

In this way, Krsna opens the door, but we unfortunately do not accept
Him. Krsna tells Arjuna, ““Because you are My friend, I am revealing to
Devahiti Desires Transcendental Knowledge 67

you the most confidential dharma.’’ What is that? “Simply surrender
unto Me.”’ This is the dharma taught by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Krsna’s incarnation and His devotee will teach the same
dharma.

We are all after happiness, but we do not know how to enjoy happiness. We want to enjoy our senses, but it is not possible with these
covered false senses. The senses must be opened, and that is the process
of purification. We are thinking of ourselves according to so many false
material identifications, but we should take Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s
advice: jivera ‘svaripa’ haya—krsnera ‘nitya-dasa.’ We must come to
understand, “‘I am the eternal servant of Krsna.’ After all, our senses
are employed for the satisfaction of somebody—either for ourselves or
for someone else. That is kdma, krodha, lobha and matsara—illusion. If
we are not serving our own lusty desires (kdma), we are serving anger
(krodha). If I am the master of anger, I can control my anger, and if I am
the master of my desires, I can control my desires. In any case, | am a
servant, and my service should be transferred to Krsna. That is the
perfection of life.

If we are situated in the transcendental position (bhakti), we can
understand Krsna. Krsna cannot be understood by mental speculation;
otherwise He would have said that He could be understood by jfdna,
karma or yoga. However, He clearly says, bhaktya mam abhijandati:
“Only by devotional service can I be understood.” If we want to know
Krsna as He is, we have to accept the process of bhakti. It is this bhakti
process that Kapiladeva will reveal to Devahiti.

TEXT 11

tam tvd gataham Saranam saranyam
sva-bhrtya-samsdra-taroh kuthéram

Jyfidsayaham prakrteh pirusasya
namdmi sad-dharma-viddm varistham

TRANSLATION

Devahiti continued: I have taken shelter of Your lotus feet because You are the only person of whom to take shelter. You are the
68 Teachings of Lord Kapila

ax which can cut the tree of material existence. I therefore offer
my obeisances unto You, who are the greatest of all transcendentalists, and I inquire from You as to the relationship between man
and woman and between spirit and matter.

PURPORT

Sankhya philosophy, as is well known, deals with prakrti and purusa.
Purusa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead or anyone who imitates
the Supreme Personality of Godhead as an enjoyer, and prakrti is nature.
In this material world, material nature is being exploited by the purusas,
or the living entities. The intricacies in the material world of the relationship of the prakrti and purusa, or the enjoyed and the enjoyer, give
rise to samsdra, or material entanglement. Devahiti wanted to cut the
tree of material entanglement, and she found the suitable weapon in
Kapila Muni. The tree of material existence is explained in the Fifteenth
Chapter of Bhagavad-gitd as an asvattha tree whose root is upward and
whose branches are downward. It is recommended there that one has to
cut the root of this material existential tree with the ax of detachment.
What is the attachment? The attachment involves prakrti and purusa.
The living entities are trying to lord it over material nature. Since the
conditioned soul takes material nature to be the object of his enjoyment,
and he takes the position of the enjoyer, he is therefore called purusa.

Devahiti questioned Kapila Muni, for she knew that only He could cut
her attachment to this material world. The living entities, in the guises of
men and women, are trying to enjoy the material energy; therefore in
one sense everyone is purusa because purusa means “enjoyer,” and
prakrti means “enjoyed.”’ In this material world both so-called men and
women are imitating the real purusa; the Supreme Personality of Godhead is actually the enjoyer in the transcendental sense, whereas all
others are prakrti.

In Bhagavad-gitd, matter is analyzed as apard, or inferior nature,
whereas beyond this inferior nature there is another, superior nature—
the living entities. Living entities are also prakrti, or enjoyed, but under
the spell of maya, the living entities are falsely trying to take the position of enjoyers. That is the cause of sarisdra-bandha, or conditional life.
Devahiti wanted to get out of conditional life and place herself in full
Devahiti Desires Transcendental Knowledge 69

surrender. The Lord is Saranya, which means “the only worthy personality to whom one can fully surrender,” because He is full of all opulences. If anyone actually wants relief, the best course is to surrender
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is also described
here as sad-dharma-viddm varistham. This indicates that of all transcendental occupations, the best is eternal loving service unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Dharma is sometimes translated as “religion,”
but that is not exactly the meaning. Dharma actually means “‘that which
one cannot give up, “that which is inseparable from oneself.” The
warmth of fire is inseparable from fire; therefore warmth is called the
dharma, or nature, of fire. Similarly, sad-dharma means “eternal occupation.”’ That eternal occupation is engagement in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord. The purpose of Kapiladeva’s Sankhya philosophy is to propagate pure, uncontaminated devotional service, and
therefore He is addressed here as the most important personality among
those who know the transcendental occupation of the living entity.

As pointed out before, Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is everyone’s real shelter (Saranam Saranyam). Everyone is seeking shelter because we are all constitutionally servants. Originally we are
servants of God; therefore it is our nature to take His shelter. Some seek
an occupation or the service of a great man; others seek the service of the
government or whatever. In any case, the ultimate shelter is Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Being Krsna’s incarnation, Kapiladeva
is also a shelter. Krsna has unlimited forms and unlimited incarnations.
It is said in Srimad-Bhagavatam that His incarnations are expanding
continuously, like waves in the ocean. Indeed, we cannot even count
them. In Brahma-samhitd it is said: Advaitam acyutam anddim anantaripam. In India there are many thousands of temples, and within these
temples there are arcd-vigrahas, Deities. All these Krsnas are nondifferent; they are one. Krsna resides in Vaikuntha and also in the temple. The Krsnas are not different, although they are ananta, unlimited.
Krsna is also the witness within everyone’s heart, and He is seeing all of
our activities. We cannot hide anything from Him, and we receive the
results of our karma because the witness is Krsna Himself within the
heart. How, then, can we avoid Him? Without Krsna’s permission, we
cannot do anything. Why does Krsna give us permission to do something
wrong? He does so because we persist. Actually He does not tell us to do
70 Teachings of Lord Kapila

anything other than surrender unto Him. We want to do something, and
Krsna may sanction it, but we go ahead and do it at our own risk. Krsna
is not responsible. However, we should know that without the sanction of
Krsna, we cannot do anything. That is a fact. Actually we are constitutionally servants of Krsna. Even though we may declare ourselves independent, we are not. Rather, we are servants falsely declaring that we are
independent. Self-realization is understanding that we are dependent on
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As Caitanya Mahaprabhu says:

ayi nanda-tanuja kinkaram
patitam mam visame bhavambudhau
krpayd tava pada-parkaja
sthita-dhili-sadrsam vicintaya

‘‘My dear Lord Krsna, son of Maharaja Nanda, I am Your eternal servant,
but somehow or other I have fallen into this ocean of nescience. Please
pick Me up from this ocean of death and place Me as one of the atoms at
Your lotus feet.” (Siksdstaka 5) Because we are under illusion, Devahiti
says: sva-bhrtya-samsdra-taroh kuthadram. In Bhagavad-gita (15.1-4),
material existence is likened unto a banyan tree with its roots upward
and its branches below. The roots of this banyan tree are very strong, but
they can be cut with an ax (kuthdram). By taking shelter of Krsna’s lotus
feet, we can cut the strong root of material existence. Because we have
given up Krsna’s service, we have become servants of so many things.
We are obliged to serve our parents, wife, children, country and so forth.
We are indebted to many people and to the demigods who give heat and
light. Although we are not paying the bill, we are taking advantage of the
sunlight and the sun’s heat. If we take advantage of electricity, we have
to pay the bill, but we don’t pay the sun bill. This means that we are actually indebted to the sun-god, Vivasvan. Similarly, the King of heaven,
Indra, is supplying water in the form of rain. Rascals say that all this
comes about by nature, but they do not know that nature is controlled. If
we don’t pay our debts by performing sacrifices, there will certainly be a
scarcity. All of these things are coming from the Supreme Father, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but we are thinking that they are coming from nature, and we are utilizing them without caring whether we
pay the bill or not. It is all right to use our father’s property, but at the
Devahiti Desires Transcendental Knowledge 71

present moment we are not acting as our Father’s sons; we are mdyd’s
sons. We do not care for our Father; however, nature is nonetheless
working under His direction. If we do not care for Him, nature will
reduce her supply, for nature will not allow demons to flourish. As stated

in Bhagavad-gita (16.19):

tan aham dvisatah kriradn
samsdresu narddhaman

ksipdmy ajasram asubhan
dsurisv eva yonisu

**Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among
men, are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various
demoniac species of life.”’

Demons are always subject to be punished, and great demons like
Ravana and Hiranyakasipu are personally punished by the Lord. Otherwise, ordinary demons are punished by the laws of material nature.
Krsna does not need to come to punish the petty demons, but when there
are great demons like Ravana, Hiranyakasipu and Karhsa, the Lord
comes as Lord Ramacandra, Lord Nrsimmhadeva or Sri Krsna to punish
them. If we do not want to be punished, we have to follow the rules and
regulations (sad-dharma). Dharma means “‘the laws given by God.”
Dharmam tu sdksdd bhagavat-pranitam. The laws are given by
Bhagavan and are written in books like Manu-samhitd and other Vedic
literatures. According to the law, we have to obey the government, and
according to dharma, we have to obey Krsna, God. We cannot manufacture our laws at home, and we cannot manufacture dharma. If one tries,
he is simply cheating the public. Such false dharmas are kicked out of
Srimad-Bhégavatam (1.1.2): dharmah projjhita. The real dharma is set
forth by Sri Krsna when He says: sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam
Saranam vraja (Bg. 18.66). All other dharmas are simply forms of cheating. We must accept the principles of Bhagavad-gitd, which constitute
the ABC’s of dharma. Actually, we only have to accept the principle of
surrender unto Krsna, but this acceptance comes after many, many
births. It is not very easy, for only after many births of struggle does one
come to his real perfection and surrender unto Krsna. At this time he
_ understands perfectly that Vasudeva, Krsna, is everything. This is the
12 Teachings of Lord Kapila

greatest lesson of Bhagavad-gitd. Everything is Krsna’s energy, and
whatever we see is but an exhibition of two types of energy. Everyone
knows that the sun has two types of energy—heat and light. Similarly,
Krsna has an external energy and an internal energy, and He also has a
marginal energy, which is a mixture of the other two. The external energy is this material world, the internal energy is the spiritual world, and
the marginal energy is the living entity. The living entity is marginal because he can remain in the material world or the spiritual world.
Bhagavad-gitd describes two types of living entities, ksara and aksara,
those living in the material world and those in the spiritual world. Those
who have fallen into the material world are attracted by the tree of samsdra, the banyan tree of material existence described in Bhagavad-gita
(Fifteenth Chapter).

It is essential that we disassociate ourselves from this tree by detachment. Cutting down this tree is very difficult, but it is possible with the
weapon of detachment. There is a Bengali proverb that states: “I'll catch
the fish, but I will not touch the water.” That type of intelligence is required. In America we see many old men on the beach who have retired
from their business to waste their time trying to catch fish. They are not
very cautious, and they touch the water. However, we have to live in this
material world in such a way that we do everything for Krsna but do not
touch the water of the material world. In this way, we will have no attachment to things of this material world. We may have many great temples, but we should not be attached to them. It is for Krsna’s sake that we
construct temples, but we must understand that the temples are Krsna’s
property. Our mission is to teach people that everything belongs to
Krsna. Only a thief will occupy something belonging to another and
claim it to be his.

The Krsna consciousness movement preaches that everything belongs
to Krsna and that everything should be utilized for Krsna’s benefit. He is
the beneficiary of everything, and it is to our benefit that we come to this
knowledge. Isdvdsyam idarh sarvam. If one realizes that everything
belongs to Krsna, one becomes the greatest mahdtmda. Being a mahatma
does not mean that one wears a big beard and a particular type of dress.
No, this awareness must be there. Whatever we have should be offered to
Krsna. If we have first-class food, we should offer it to Him. If we have
nothing, we can offer Him a leaf, a flower, a little water or fruit. This can
Devahiti Desires Transcendental Knowledge 73

be collected by anyone anywhere without having to pay money. As Sri
Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita (9.26):

patram puspam phalam toyam
yo me bhaktyd prayacchati

tad aham bhakty-upahrtam
asndmi prayatatmanah

**If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I
will accept it.”

The point is that we should offer something to Krsna with devotion. It
is not that Krsna is hungry and is asking for food. No, He is feeding
everyone, supplying everyone with all the necessities: eko bahiinadm yo
vidadhati kaman (Katha Upanisad 2.2.13). What, then, is He requesting? He is asking for bhakti, devotion, because He wants us to love Him.
We are suffering in this material world, entangled in the tree of material
existence, moving from one branch to another, and because of this we
are suffering. Krsna does not want us to suffer, jumping like monkeys
from branch to branch. We must come to Him and surrender to Him.
When we come to this knowledge, we become perfect in knowledge.
When we take shelter at the lotus feet of Krsna, we are no longer debtors
to anyone. Na kinkaro naéyam rni (Bhag. 11.5.41). Krsna assures us,
aham tvaém sarva-pdpebhyo moksayisyami: “I'll give you all relief.”
(Bg. 18.66) This is what we actually want. Therefore Devahiti herein
takes shelter of Kapiladeva and tells Him, “You are the ax capable of
making me detached.’’ When our attachment to the material world is
severed, we become free. Bhakti is the means by which we can develop
this detachment. Vairdgya-vidyd-nija-bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga is the
science of detachment. This verse was composed by Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya when he understood that Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sérvabhauma Bhattdcérya was a
great logician, and he composed a hundred verses to Caitanya Mahiprabhu, wherein he tells the Lord:

vairdgya-vidyd-nija-bhakti-yogaSiksGrtham ekah purusah purdnah
14 Teachings of Lord Kapila

sri-krsna-caitanya-sarira-dhari
krpambudhir yas tam aham prapadye

‘“Let me take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna,
who has descended in the form of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to teach us
real knowledge, His devotional service, and detachment from whatever
does not foster Krsna consciousness. He has descended because He is an
ocean of transcendental mercy. Let me surrender unto His lotus feet.”’
(Cc. Madhya 6.254)

When a person advances in bhakti-yoga, he will automatically become
detached from material attractions. There are many American and European boys and girls in this Krgna consciousness movement who have
been born in countries where they can enjoy a good deal of material
affluence, but they consider this material happiness and affluence like
garbage in the street. Because they are devotees of Vasudeva, they are no
longer attached to these material things. This is the result of bhaktiyoga, which enables one to be detached from material enjoyment. That
detachment is the sign that one is advancing in bhakti-yoga. Bhaktih
paresanubhavo viraktir anyatra ca (Bhag. 11.2.42). That is the test of
advancing in bhakti. If we are advanced, we are no longer attached to
material enjoyment. It is not that we think ourselves great devotees and
then go ahead and enjoy material things. As stated in Bhagavad-gita
(5.22):

ye hi samsparsajad bhoga
duhkha-yonaya eva te

ddy-antavantah kaunteya
na tesu ramate budhah

‘‘An intelligent person does not take part in the sources of misery, which
are due to contact with the material senses. O son of Kunti, such
pleasures have a beginning and an end, and so the wise man does not
delight in them.” When one sees something superior, he immediately rejects that which is inferior. Actually we cannot bring all this about by our
own endeavor; therefore we have to take shelter of Krsna, and He will
help. Since our only business is to take shelter of Krsna, Devahiti says,
“T am taking shelter of You so that You can cut my attachment to this material life. Why should You do this? Because I am Your eternal servant.”
Devahiti Desires Transcendental Knowledge 75

Bhaktivinoda Thakura says, anddi karama-phale, padi’ bhavaérmavaJale, taribdre na dekhi updya. If we are thrown into the ocean, there is a
great struggle, even if we may be very great swimmers. There is no peace
in this material world, however expert we may be in dealing with it.
There is nothing but struggle. We cannot live here peacefully. It is not
possible. Even if we are nonviolent and hurt no one, there will be trouble. However, if somehow or other we manage to reach the shore, we will
find peace. There is peace even if we are an inch out of the water. Tava
pdda-parikaja-sthita-dhili sadrsam vicintaya (Siksdstaka 5). If somehow
or other we become one of the particles of dust at Krsna’s lotus feet, we
will be liberated.

We may be a Hindu or a Muslim or a Christian for fifty or sixty years,
or at the utmost one hundred, but again we have to take birth and be
something else. We are thinking in terms of these religious designations,
which are called asad-dharma, meaning that they may change at any
moment. But what is our real dharma? Real dharma is sad-dharma, that
which will not change, and this sad-dharma necessitates surrendering
unto Krsna. This dharma will continue eternally. There are many propounders of sad-dharma, but actually the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the best propounder because He knows the reality. It is therefore
said of the Gosvamis: ndnd-Sdstra-vicdranaika-nipunau sad-dharmasarnsthapakau. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s direct disciples, the
Gosvamis, tried to establish sad-dharma, and we are trying to follow in
their footsteps by establishing real dharma throughout the world with
this Krsna consciousness movement.
CHAPTER SEVEN

Lord Kapila Begins
to Explain Self-realization

TEXT 12

maitreya uvdca
iti sva-matur niravadyam ipsitam
nisamya pumsdm apavarga-vardhanam
dhiyadbhinandydtmavatam satadm gatir
babhdsa isat-smita-sobhitananah

TRANSLATION

After hearing of His mother’s uncontaminated desire for transcendental realization, the Lord thanked her within Himself for
her questions, and thus, His face smiling, He explained the path of
the transcendentalists, who are interested in self-realization.

PURPORT

Devahiti has surrendered her confession of material entanglement
and her desire to gain release. Her questions to Lord Kapila are very interesting for persons who are actually trying to get liberation from material entanglement and attain perfection. Unless one is interested in
understanding his spiritual life, or his constitutional position, and unless
he also feels inconvenience in material existence, his human form of life
is spoiled. Only a foolish man does not care for the transcendental
necessities of life and simply engages like an animal in eating, sleeping,
defending and mating. Lord Kapila was very much satisfied by His
mother’s questions because the answers stimulate one’s desire for liberation from the conditional life of material existence. Such questions are
called apavarga-vardhanam. Those who are actually spiritually interested are called sat, or devotees. Satam prasargat. Sat means “‘that

17
18 Teachings of Lord Kapila

which eternally exists,” and asat means “‘that which is not eternal.”’ Unless one is situated on the spiritual platform, he is not sat; he is asat. The
asat stands on a platform which will not exist, but anyone who stands on
the spiritual platform will exist eternally. As spirit soul, everyone exists
eternally, but the asat has accepted the material world as his shelter, and
therefore he is full of anxiety. Asad-grahdn, the desire to enjoy matter,
is the cause of the soul’s being asat. Actually, the spirit soul is not asat.
As soon as one is conscious of this fact and takes to Krsna consciousness,
he becomes sat. Satdm gatih, the path of the eternal, is very interesting
to persons who are after liberation, and His Lordship Kapila began to
speak about that path.

Those who are sat are thus transcendentalists advanced in spiritual
life, and when they hear questions from those who want to understand
spiritual life, they become very happy. Transcendentalists are not interested in worldly talks. Indeed, worldly talks are very disgusting to
them, and they avoid the company of those who talk about nonsensical
worldly affairs. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu advised His disciples: gramyakathé na sunibe. The word grdmya refers to that pertaining to one’s
village, society or neighborhood. People are interested in talking about
gramya-katha. Newspapers, for instance, are filled with gramya-katha.
There is no spiritual understanding in them. In the United States there
are many newspapers, and simply to publish the New York Times many
trees have to be killed. Now there is a paper scarcity. Why are they
uselessly killing trees just for gradmya-katha? They are only interested
in making a profit.

There is, however, another kind of katha—krsna-kathd. There are
literatures which may be nicely presented from the literary point of
view, but if there is no glorification of the Supreme Lord, they are
useless.

na yad vacas citra-padam harer yaso
Jagat-pavitram pragrnita karhicit

tad vayasam tirtham usanti manasa
na yatra hamsa niramanty usikksayah

‘Those words which do not describe the glories of the Lord, who alone
can sanctify the atmosphere of the whole universe, are considered by
Lord Kapila Begins to Explain Self-realization 19

saintly persons to be like unto a pilgrimage for crows. Since the allperfect persons are inhabitants of the transcendental abode, they do not
derive any pleasure there.” (Bhdg. 1.5.10)

Worldly literatures are like places where crows take pleasure. In the
bird society, there are crows and swans, and crows are interested in
places where filthy things are thrown. However, swans prefer nice clear
water with lotus flowers, and it is in such places that they take their
pleasure. Similarly, there are men who are like crows and men like
swans. That is a natural division. According to an old English proverb,
Birds of a feather flock together. Crows mix with crows, and swans mix
with swans. Since devotees are like swans (hamsas), a most advanced
devotee is called paramahamsa. The paramahamsas are not interested in
subjects fit for crows. A person who is interested in inquiring about transcendental subjects, krsna-katha, makes a paramahamsa very glad.
Therefore Kapiladeva was very glad to hear that His mother was eager to
receive information on how to be delivered from material bondage:

atha me deva sammoham
apdakrastum tvam arhasi

yo ‘vagraho ’ham mametity
etasmin yoyitas tvaya

‘‘Now be pleased, my Lord, to dispel my great delusion. Due to my feeling of false ego, I have been engaged by Your maya and have identified
myself with the body and consequent bodily relations.” (Bhdg. 3.25.10)

Caitanya Mahaprabhu advised His disciples never to eat palatable
food, never to talk about village topics and never to read ordinary
novels, poems and newspapers. One may ask, “How is it that in the
modern age these Europeans and Americans of the Krsna consciousness
movement do not take interest in newspapers?”’ Newspapers are very
popular in the West. Each day the papers are published in three or four
editions, and they are all selling. However, these American boys and girls
who have come to Krsna consciousness have stopped reading newspapers.
They do not know what is happening from day to day, and it does not
matter. All of this is a waste of time. It is better that they read literatures
like Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gitdé. Why waste one’s valuable
time? |
80 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Kapiladeva was very glad that His mother was interested only in spiritual advancement. This material world is called pavarga, and to nullify it
is called apavarga. In this material world, people are laboring very hard
simply to earn some money. This creates a hellish situation, and this is
the way of material life. People have become so dull that they do not
understand the meaning of liberation. They have become just like
animals. If an animal is informed that there is such a thing as liberation,
how will he understand it? It is not possible. Similarly, at the present
moment, human beings have become exactly like animals. They do not
know the meaning of apavarga, liberation. Yet there was a time when
people understood that human life was meant for apavarga. The questions are raised by Devahiti, and the answers are given by Kapiladeva.
That is apavarga-vardhanam. As far as material maintenance is concerned, the Ssdstras never stress it. Rather, they say that one’s maintenance will come automatically. God gives food to animals, birds and
aquatics. Why should He not give it to one who is interested in
apavarga? Unfortunately people have no faith, and therefore good
association is required.

People should not waste their time associating with crows; they should
associate with swans. When garbage is thrown out, crows and dogs come
to see what is there, but no sane man will go. Those who are interested in
trying to get pleasure out of this material world are actually chewing the
chewed. Punah punas carvita-carvandnam (Bhdg. 7.5.30). If one picks
up a piece of sugarcane which has already been chewed, he is a fool. We
must know that the juice has already been taken out of that sugarcane.
What will one get by chewing it? However, there are animals who are
simply interested in chewing the chewed. Material life means chewing
the chewed. A father educates his son to earn a livelihood, get married
and settle down, but he himself already knows that by doing this he has
not become satisfied. Why, then, is he engaging his son in this same business? A real father is one who does not allow his son to chew the chewed.
Pité na sa sydj janani na sé syat... na mocayed yah samupeta-mrtyum:
one should not become a father or a mother unless one is able to save his
children from the impending clutches of death. (Bhag. 5.5.18) That is
the duty of the father and mother. How can this be done? A father and
mother should educate their son in Krsna consciousness. Then he can be
saved. They should educate the son in such a way that there is no
Lord Kapila Begins to Explain Self-realization 8]

pavarga. If we do not go forward to liberation, we promote a civilization
of cats and dogs. Eating, sleeping, mating, defending, fearing and dying
are all experienced by cats and dogs, but human life is meant for another
purpose. Of course we have to maintain the body; it is not that we should
neglect it. But we should not unnecessarily engage in the maintenance of
the body.

yasydtma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke

sva-dhih kalatraddisu bhauma iya-dhih
yat tirtha-buddhih salile na karhici

Janesv abhijriesu sa eva go-kharah

‘‘A human being who identifies this body made of three elements as the
self, who considers the by-products of the body to be his kinsmen, who
considers the land of his birth as worshipable, and who goes to a place of
pilgrimage simply to take a bath rather than meet men of transcendental knowledge there, is to be considered like a cow or an ass.”
(Bhag. 10.84.13)

From the Vedas we can receive education of all kinds. On a mango
tree, there are ripened mangoes and green mangoes. The SrimadBhagavatam is the ripened mango of the desire tree of Vedic knowledge:
nigama-kalpa-taror galitarh phalam. If the mango is tasted by the parrot, it becomes doubly tasty. The word suka means parrot, and Sukadeva
Gosvami spoke Srimad-Bhagavatam. It is therefore more relishable from
his lips.

nigama-kalpa-taror galitam phalam
Suka-mukhad amrta-drava-sarryutam

pibata bhagavatam rasam dlayam
muhur aho rasiké bhuvi bhavukah

“O expert and thoughtful men, relish Srimad-Bhagavatam, the mature
fruit of the desire tree of Vedic literatures. It emanated from the lips of
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami. Therefore this fruit has become even more
tasteful, although its nectarean juice was already relishable for all, including liberated souls.” (Bhag. 1.1.3) It is regrettable that in India,
where these literatures are available, people are not interested. They are
interested in Marxist literature but not Srimad-Bhagavatam, and this is
India’s misfortune.
82 Teachings of Lord Kapila

When a student hears spiritual subjects attentively, the spiritual
master becomes very happy. Kapiladeva was very happy to see His
mother eager to understand spiritual subject matters. He therefore
thanked His mother for her inquiry.

Generally people are interested in things that give immediate pleasure.
We want to taste something tasty to the tongue, regardless of whether it
is edible or not. Hogs very readily eat stool, and they do so without discrimination. They have no idea of tapasya, penance. When one engages
in spiritual realization, one has to undergo tapasya. However, this has
been made very easy by Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Ceto-darpana-mdarjanam
bhava-mahd-ddavdgni-nirvdpanam. All we have to do is spare a little
time and chant Hare Krsna, but we are not even ready for this much
tapasya. Krsna is more interested in leading us down the path of liberation than we are in going. He has given us a very simple method: harer
nama harer ndma harer ndmaiva kevalam. We need only chant Hare
Krsna. To perfect this chanting of Hare Krsna, there is no hard-and-fast
rule. Simply by chanting, we will attain perfection. Being contaminated
by Kali-yuga, however, we are unfortunate and therefore we have no attraction to the holy names of Krsna. Thus when Kapiladeva or His representative sees someone a little interested, he becomes very glad and
thanks him. When Kapiladeva saw His mother interested, He thanked
her from within, not openly.

Kapiladeva was very glad, and He began to speak. Kapiladeva was an
incarnation of God and was a young boy; therefore His face was very
beautiful. When He answered this question, He became even more
beautiful, and He smiled because He was pleased at His mother’s question. Krsna is also very beautiful, but when a devotee serves Him and
comes to Him, He becomes even more beautiful. When a devotee with all
his heart and soul serves Krsna, dresses Him in nice garments and gives
Him a flower, Krsna smiles. If you can get Krsna to smile upon you just
once, your life’s goal is fulfilled.

Thus smiling, Kapiladeva began to enlighten His mother.

TEXT 13

sri-bhagavan uvdca
yoga Gdhydtmikah pumsam
Lord Kapila Begins to Explain Self-realization 83

mato nihsreyasdya me
atyantoparatir yatra
duhkhasya ca sukhasya ca

TRANSLATION

The Personality of Godhead answered: That yoga system which
relates to the Lord and the individual soul, which is meant for the
ultimate benefit of the living entity, and which causes detachment
from all happiness and distress in the material world, is the highest
yoga system.

PURPORT

In the material world, everyone is striving for some material happiness, but as soon as we get some material happiness, there is also material
distress. In the material world one cannot have unadulterated happiness.
Any kind of happiness one has is contaminated by distress also. For example, if we want to drink milk, we have to bother to maintain a cow and
keep her fit to supply milk. Drinking milk is very nice; it is also
pleasure. But for the sake of drinking milk one has to accept so much
trouble. The yoga system, as here stated by the Lord, is meant to end all
material happiness and material distress. The best yoga, as taught in
Bhagavad-gita by Krsna, is bhakti-yoga. It is also mentioned in the Gita
that one should try to be tolerant and not be disturbed by material happiness or distress. Of course, one may say that he is not disturbed by material happiness, but he does not know that just after one enjoys so-called
material happiness, material distress will follow. This is the law of the
material world. Lord Kapila states that the yoga system is the science of
the spirit. One practices yoga in order to attain perfection on the spiritual
platform. There is no question of material happiness or distress. It is
transcendental. Lord Kapila will eventually explain how it is transcendental, but the preliminary introduction is given here.

The attempt in this material world to maximize happiness and minimize distress is called the struggle for existence. Generally yoga is practiced to acquire some material profit. There are eight kinds of yogic
perfection (siddhis): anima, laghima, prapti, iSitva, vasitva, mahima,
prakdmya and kdmavasdyitd. A real yogi can become smaller than the

 
84. Teachings of Lord Kapila

smallest, lighter than the lightest and bigger than the biggest. Whatever
he wants he can produce immediately in his hand. He can even create a
planet. These are some of the yoga-siddhis, but here it is stated that the
supreme yoga system does not aim at material happiness or relief from
distresses caused by material inconvenience. Everyone is trying to get out
of material distress and gain some happiness. In any case, when something is material, there is only so-called happiness and so-called distress.
For instance, there may be fireworks going on, and this may be happiness
for someone but distress for us. Some people are thinking that these fireworks are very enjoyable, and we are thinking that they are very inconvenient. That is the material world. On one side there is happiness, and
on the other side there is distress. Both happiness and distress are actually illusions. In summer, water is happiness, but in winter it is distress. The water is the same, but at one time it brings happiness and at
another time it brings distress. When a son is born, he brings happiness,
but when he dies, he brings distress. In either case, the son is the same.

This material world is the world of duality, and we cannot understand
happiness without distress or distress without happiness. This is
therefore called the relative world. Spiritual happiness is above these
dualities, and that spiritual happiness is the perfection of yoga. Yoga
ddhydtmikah. Yoga is the happiness of the soul, and the individual soul
can be happy when it is with the Supersoul, the Supreme Soul. Nityo
nityandm cetanas cetandndm. There is the Supreme Soul, or the
supreme living being, and there are many individual souls, individual
beings. We are many, but the principal living being is one, Krsna. He is
the fire, and we are the sparks from that fire. The sparks are illuminated
when they are with the original fire, but if the sparks no longer associate
with the original fire, they are extinguished. Similarly, our real happiness is in enjoying with the Supreme Being. Happiness is being in His
company. Krsna is not alone, but is always with His friends, either the
gopis or the cowherd boys, or with His mother and father. We never find
Krsna alone. He may be with Radharani or with His devotees. He is like a
king or president. When one says that the king or president is coming, it
is understood that he is not coming alone. He comes with His secretaries,
ministers and many others.

The word yoga means “connection,” and dtma means “soul” and
sometimes “mind” or “‘body.’’ The material body has nothing to do

9
Lord Kapila Begins to Explain Self-realization 85

with the Supreme Being because the Supreme Being is completely spiritual. He has no material covering. One who thinks that Krsna, the
Supreme Being, has a material covering is himself covered by mdyd.
Krsna does not say that He comes as an ordinary living being. Rather, His
advent is totally transcendental. Janma karma ca me divyam evam yo
vetti tattvatah (Bg. 4.4). We therefore have to learn how Krsna takes His
birth, which is not ordinary. If it were ordinary, why should we observe
the Janmastami ceremony? His birth is divyam, divine. Everything
about Krsna is divine, and if we think that Krsna is like us, we immediately become midhas, fools. In the words of Bhagavad-gita (9.11):

avajGnanti mam midha
madnusim tanum Gsritam

param bhaévam ajdnanto
mama bhita-mahesvaram

“‘Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know
My transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be.”

Actually Krsna is the original Supreme Being, the original spirit soul.
We are simply minute parts and parcels of Krsna. If we connect with
Krsna, we are illuminated just as Krsna is illuminated. If we fall down
from Krsna, our spiritual power and illumination are extinguished.
The word yoga means connecting or linking with that original source.
Yoga is the Sanskrit word meaning “connection,” and viyoga means
“disconnection.”

Kapiladeva is referred to as Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Bhagavan makes no mistakes. Nadrdyanah paro ’vyaktat: even
Sankaracarya says that “Bhagavan, Narayana, does not belong to this
material world.” When we speak of Bhagavan, or when the Sdstras refer
to Bhagavan, we refer to Him who is above material understanding. As
stated here, sri-bhagavan uvdca. It does not say vydsadeva uvdca or
kapiladeva uvdca. Similarly, in Bhagavad-gitd, Vyasadeva says, Sribhagavan uvaca. Bhagavan refers to Him who is above the defects of
this material world. Bhagavan is not subject to the four deficiencies of
the living entities. Being imperfect, living entities are illusioned and
subject to commit mistakes. They also have the tendency to cheat others.
When one who has no knowledge tries to become a teacher or preacher,
86 Teachings of Lord Kapila

he is actually cheating others. Since we ourselves do not possess perfect
knowledge, we simply try to teach what Sri Bhagavan says. We do not
manufacture our own teachings. So-called scholars and learned men
manufacture their own teachings and give their opinions. In the West especially, we find much philosophical speculation and mental gymnastics,
but such philosophy can never be perfect. We have to take our ideas
from Bhagavan; then they will be perfect. We read Bhagavad-gita because it is perfect. There is no mistake in it; there is no illusion in it;
there is no cheating in it. Nor is it delivered by one whose senses are im
perfect. Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (7.26):

veddham samatitani
vartamanani carjuna

bhavisyani ca bhitani
mam tu veda na kascana

‘‘O Arjuna, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I know everything
that has happened in the past, all that is happening in the present, and all
things that are yet to come. I also know all living entities; but Me no one
knows.”

God knows everything, but we do not know what is God. That is our
position. Our position is not knowing. [svarah sarva-bhitanam hrd-dese
"rjuna tisthati (Bg. 18.61). Isvara, God, Krsna, is situated in everyone’s
heart. Sarvasya cadham hrdi sannivistah: “‘I have entered into everyone’s
heart.” (Bg. 15.15) The Supreme Lord refers not only to the hearts of
human beings but to those of animals and everything else.

anddntara-stha-paramanu-caydntara-stham
govindam Gdi-purusam tam aham bhajami

(Brahma-samhita 5.35)

The Supreme Lord is within the atom as Paramatma, and therefore He is
also within the individual soul. Being within everything, He knows
everything. Since He knows everything, we have to take lessons from
Him. If we take what Bhagavan says as perfect knowledge, we receive
perfect knowledge. For receiving this knowledge, there is a disciplic suc
cession (parampara), which is described in Bhagavad-gita (4.2):

a os — ca cent it alll ie Nl meni
Lord Kapila Begins to Explain Self-realization 87

evam parampara-praptam
imam rdjarsayo viduh

‘This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way.”’ This Krsna
consciousness philosophy is very easy because we do not manufacture
ideas. We take the ideas and the words delivered by the Supreme Person,
Krsna, or His incarnation or representative. His representative does not
say anything which Krsna Himself does not say. It is very easy to be a
representative, but one cannot be a representative of Krsna if one tries to
interpret Krsna’s words in a whimsical way.

There is no authority superior to Sri Krsna, and if we stick to this
principle, we can become gurus. We don’t need to change our position to
become a guru. All we have to do is follow in the disciplic succession
stemming from Sri Krsna. Caitanya Mahaprabhu has advised: dmdra
Gjfidya guru hafia tara’ ei desa (Cc. Madhya 7.128). Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructed people to learn from Him and then go teach people
within their own villages. One may think, “I am illiterate and have no
education. I was not born in a very high family. How can I become a
guru?” Caitanya Mahaprabhu says that it is not very difficult. Yare
dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna’-upadesa: “Simply speak whatever Krsna
speaks. Then you become a guru.’’ Whoever speaks what Krsna has not
spoken is not a guru but a rascal. A guru only speaks what Krsna has
spoken. This is the sastric injunction.

sat-karma-nipuno vipro
mantra-tantra-visdradah

avaisnavo gurur na sydd
vaisnavah sva-paco guruh

‘‘A scholarly brahmana expert in all subjects of Vedic knowledge is unfit
to become a spiritual master without being a Vaisnava, but a person born
in a family of a lower class can become a spiritual master if he is a
Vaisnava.” (Padma Purana)

People are in darkness, and they have to be enlightened. We have
finally come from the animal kingdom to the human form, and now this
human form gives us the opportunity to get out of the cycle of birth and
88 Teachings of Lord Kapila

death. The mission of this Krsna consciousness society is to awaken
people to their original consciousness. Jiva jdga, jiva jaga, gordcadnda
bale. The word gordcanda refers to Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who tells the
living entity, “Get up! Get up! How long will you continue to sleep?”’
Kata nidré yao may4-pisdacira kole. The same is stated here. It is the
prime business of human beings to connect again with the Supreme Soul.
The purpose of yoga is to awaken to Krsna consciousness and connect
oneself again with Krsna. That is ddhydtmika-yoga. Yoga does not mean
showing some mystic magic. The supreme yogi is described by Sri Krsna

Himself in Bhagavad-gita (6.47):

yoginadm api sarvesam
mad-gatendntaradtmana

Sraddhdavan bhajate yo mam
sa me yuktatamo matah

“‘And of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with
Me in yoga and is the highest of all.”

There are many yogis and many different types of yoga systems, and
all of these are discussed in Bhagavad-gita. There is hatha-yoga, karmayoga, jidna-yoga and rdja-yoga; however, the real yoga system is meant
for reviving our connection with Krsna. Here it is said: yoga ddhyéatmikah pumsam. Adhyatmikah: we are living entities, souls. It is not that
we are disconnected from Krsna, but we have simply forgotten Him. It is
not possible to be disconnected, but it is possible to be covered. In the

words of Krsna in Bhagavad-gita (7.25):

naham prakdsah sarvasya
yogamayd-samavrtah

midho ’yam nabhijanati
loko mém ajam avyayam

“Tam never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am
covered by My eternal creative potency | yogamdya]; and so the deluded
world knows Me not, who am unborn and infallible.”’
Lord Kapila Begins to Explain Self-realization 89

There is yoga, and there is yogamdyd. Yogamdaya means forgetfulness. First of all we have to understand what is the soul. At the present
moment, people are in such darkness that they do not even understand
the soul. Therefore Bhagavad-gita (2.13) first of all teaches what the

soul is:

dehino ’smin yatha dehe
kaumaram yauvanam jara

tatha dehdntara-praptir
dhiras tatra na muhyati

‘‘As the embodied soul continually passes in this body from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.”’ The word dehi
means “the proprietor of the body.” We are thinking, “I am this body,”’
but actually this is not so. We are the proprietors of the body, and that is
the real understanding of the self. We do not say, “I am this finger”’ or
“I am this hand.”’ Rather, we say, “This is my finger, this is my head,
this is my leg, etc.’ Similarly, the same can be said about the entire body.
‘This is my body.” This means that I am the proprietor of this body. The
body has been given by maya, the material energy.

prakrteh kriyamanani
gunaih karmani sarvasah

ahankdara-vimidhatma
kartaham iti manyate

‘The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of
material nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities that are in actuality carried out by nature.” (Bg. 3.27)

The living entity receives different types of bodies according to
karma. One living entity may receive a cat body, another a dog body, and
so forth. Why are there so many different bodies? Why not one kind of
body? The answer to this is also given in Bhagavad-gita (13.22):

kdranam guna-sango ‘sya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu
90 Teachings of Lord Kapila

“It is due to his association with the modes of material nature. Thus he
meets with good and evil among various species.”

Because the soul within the body associates with the three modes of
material nature (goodness, passion and ignorance), he receives different
types of bodies. One doesn’t have to aspire for his next body; one need
only rest assured that it will be a different body. On the other hand,
Krsna does not say what kind of body one will be awarded. That depends
on qualification. If one associates with the mode of goodness, he is elevated to the higher planetary systems. If he associates with the mode of
passion, he remains here. And if one associates with the mode of ignorance and darkness, he goes down to lower life forms—animals, trees
and plants. This is the proclamation of Sri Krsna in Bhagavad-gita
(14.18):

uirdhvam gacchanti sattva-stha
madhye tisthanti rajasah

Jaghanya-guna-vrtti-stha
adho gacchanti tamasah

‘Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the
higher planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthly planets;
and those in the mode of ignorance go down to the hellish worlds.”
There are 8,400,000 species of life, and all of these arise from one’s
association with the modes of nature (karanam guna-sarigo ’sya). And,
according to the body, one undergoes distress and happiness. One cannot
expect a dog to enjoy the same happiness that a king or rich man enjoys.
Whether one enjoys this or that happiness or suffers this or that distress,
both distress and happiness are due to the material body. Yoga means
transcending the distress or happiness of the material body. If we connect ourselves with Krsna through the supreme yoga, we can get rid of
material happiness and distress arising from the body. Reconnecting with
Krsna is called bhakti-yoga, and Krsna comes to instruct us in this
supreme yoga. In essence, He says, “Just revive your connection with
Me, you rascal. Give up all these manufactured yogas and religions and
just surrender unto Me.” That is Krsna’s instruction, and Krsna’s representative, the incarnation or the guru, says the same thing. Although
Kapiladeva is an incarnation of Krsna, He acts as the representative of
Lord Kapila Begins to Explain Self-realization 9)

Krsna, the guru. If we just accept the principle of surrender unto Krsna,
we will become actually transcendental to so-called material happiness.
We should not be captivated by material happiness or aggrieved by material distress. These are causes for bondage. Material happiness is not
actual happiness. It is actually distress. We try to be happy by obtaining
money, but money is not very easily obtained, and we have to undergo a
great deal of distress to get it. However, we accept this distress with the
hope of getting some false happiness. If we purify our senses, on the
other hand, we can come to the spiritual platform. Real happiness lies in
engaging our senses to satisfy the senses of Krsna. In this way our senses
are spiritualized, and this is called ddhydtmika-yoga or bhakti-yoga.
This is the yoga that Lord Kapiladeva is herein expounding.
CHAPTER EIGHT

Bhakti-yoga:
The Supreme Yoga System

TEXT 14

tam imam te pravaksyami
yam avocam purdnaghe

rsinadm srotu-kamaném
yogam sarvdriga-naipunam

TRANSLATION

O most pious mother, I shall now explain unto you the ancient
yoga system, which I explained formerly to the great sages. It is
serviceable and practical in every way.

PURPORT

The Lord does not manufacture a new system of yoga. Sometimes it is
claimed that someone has become an incarnation of God and is expounding a new theological aspect of the Absolute Truth. But here we find that
although Kapila Muni is the Lord Himself and is capable of manufacturing a new doctrine for His mother, He nevertheless says, “‘I shall just explain the ancient system that I once explained to the great sages because
they were also anxious to hear about it.”” When we have a superexcellent
process already present in Vedic scriptures, there is no need to concoct a
new system, to mislead the innocent public. At present it has become a
fashion to reject the standard system and present something bogus in the
name of a newly invented process of yoga.

The supreme ancient system of yoga pertains to the soul. Presently, in
America especially, hatha-yoga is very popular. It appeals to fat ladies
who go to the classes to reduce and keep their digestive systems regular.

93
 

94. Teachings of Lord Kapila

Many people are interested in this kind of gymnastic yoga, but real yoga
is ddhyatmika. Adhydtmika means to awaken the soul to his proper position. The soul is purusa, spirit, and his business is to reconnect his lost
relationship with Krsna.

Herein Kapiladeva says that He previously delivered this yoga system
to the great rsis, the great sages. This is the process of sravana, hearing.
One must be very eager to hear, for spiritual life begins with hearing.

atah Ssri-krsna-nadmddi
na bhaved graéhyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvddau
svayam eva sphuraty adah

(Bhakti-rasamrta-sindu 1.2.234)

It is thus stated in the Sdstras that it is not possible to appreciate or
understand Krsna with our blunt material senses. Krsna’s name, form,
qualities, pastimes, paraphernalia and abode are all part and parcel of
Krsna. However, understanding Krsna begins with hearing and chanting
His name. Then there is His form. Generally, for the neophyte, these
items are essential—to hear His name and qualities and see and worship
His form. That is Krsna’s personal instruction:

man-man4é bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yaji mam namaskuru

‘Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, offer obeisances and worship Me.” (Bg. 9.34)

Bhagavan Es Krsna is present in the temple Deity, and even if a child
comes to offer his respects, he is counted as a devotee. A small child may
not know anything, but simply by seeing the Deity, chanting and dancing, he is benefited. Temples are meant to give everyone a chance to advance in Krsna consciousness one step at a time.

svalpam apy asya dharmasya
trayate mahato bhayat
Bhakti-yoga: The Supreme Yoga System 95

“‘A little advancement on this path can protect one from the most
dangerous type of fear.” (Bg. 2.40) Even if we do a little on the path of
bhakti, it goes to our account. For instance, if we deposit only two dollars
in a savings bank, it is kept in our account, and it will increase with interest. Similarly, if one performs even a little devotional service, it is not
lost. One may come and join this Krsna consciousness movement, render
some service and after a while fall down. However, whatever service has
been rendered is to one’s permanent credit. That will never be lost.
When one begins again, he begins at the point where he has left off. This
is the instruction of Bhagavad-gita (6.41):

Sucinadm srimatam gehe
yoga-bhrasto ’bhijdyate

‘The unsuccessful yogi is born into a family of righteous people or into a
family of rich aristocracy.” Thus if one fails to perfect his bhakti-yoga,
he is given another chance in the next life. According to a Bengali poem:

Suci haya muci haya yadi krsna tydje
muci haya suci haya yadi krsna-bhaje

If one takes to Krsna consciousness, even if he is born in a family of a
cobbler (muci), he becomes ereater than a brdhmana (Suci). However, if
one is born in a bradhmana family and gives up Krsna consciousness, he
becomes a muci, a cobbler. Thus the door of devotion is open to everyone, whoever he may be. Krsna Himself says that regardless of one’s
position, if one takes shelter of Him, one can approach the supreme
destination.

mam hi partha vyapasritya
ye “pi syuh pdpa-yonayah
striyo vaisyds tatha sidrds
te ‘pi yanti pardm gatim

‘‘O son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth—women, vaisyas [merchants], as well as sidras [workers] —can
96 Teachings of Lord Kapila

approach the supreme destination.” (Bg. 9.32) And Sukadeva Gosvami
says:
kirdta-hindandhra-pulinda-pulkasa
abhira-sumbha yavanéh khasddayah
ye "nye ca papa yad-apdasraydsrayah

Sudhyanti tasmai prabhavisnave namah

‘“Kirata, Hana, Andhra, Pulinda, Pulkaga, Abhira, Sumbha, Yavana and
the Khasa races and even others who are addicted to sinful acts can
be purified by taking shelter of the devotees of the Lord, due to His
being the supreme power. I beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto
Him.” (Bhdg. 2.4.18) Krsna consciousness is so complete that it is allembracing. Everyone has an occupational duty as a brdhmana, ksatriya,
vaisya or Stidra, but one does not have to give up his occupational duty to
take to Krsna consciousness. And if one takes to Krsna consciousness but
does not succeed, what has he lost? Even if he falls down, there is no loss.
On the other hand, if a man perfectly performs his own duties (svadharma) but is not Krsna conscious, what does he gain? There is actually
no gain. Kapiladeva explains that once one takes to the path of bhaktiyoga, one never actually falls down. Once begun, bhakti-yoga continues,
even if one temporarily falls down. One is given another chance by taking birth in a good family, either in a wealthy family, a learned family or
a brahmana family. If one executes his duties as a brahmana, Visnu will
be very pleased, and if one executes his duties perfectly as a ksatriya or
Stidra, Visnu will also be very pleased. One does not have to change one’s
position. In Bhagavad-gita (18.46) Sri Krsna says that every man can become perfect by following his qualities of work:

yatah pravrttir bhitanam
yena sarvam idam tatam

sva-karmand tam abhyarcya
siddhim vindati mdnavah

‘“By worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is allpervading, man can, in the performance of his own duty, attain perfection.”’ Thus if one executes his duties as a perfect ksatriya, vaisya, Sidra
or whatever, Visnu will be pleased. The purpose of work is to please
Bhakti-yoga: The Supreme Yoga System 97

Visnu. Unfortunately, people have forgotten this. Varndsrama-dharma,
the Vedic system of society, is therefore very important in that it is
meant to give human beings a chance to perfect their lives by pleasing
Krsna. Unfortunately, the varndsrama-dharma has been lost in this age.
Therefore Caitanya Mahaprabhu, just to give relief to the rotting, conditioned souls of this age of Kali-yuga, has given us the mahd-mantra.

harer ndma harer ndma
harer ndmaiva kevalam

kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha

‘In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy, the only means of deliverance is
chanting of the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no
other way. There is no other way.” (Brhan-ndradiya Purdna) Although
we may try to revive the perfect varndsrama system, it is not possible in
this age. People are fallen, disturbed and unfortunate:

prayendlpdyusah sabhya
kalav asmin yuge janah
mandah sumanda-matayo

manda-bhagya hy upadrutah

‘‘O learned one, in this iron age of Kali men have but short lives. They
are quarrelsome, lazy, misguided, unlucky and, above all, always disturbed.”’ (Bhag. 1.1.10) In this age, there will be insufficient rainfall and
food, and the government will plunder one’s income by heavy taxation.
All of these characteristics of Kali-yuga are described in SrimadBhagavatam. People will become so disgusted that they will suddenly
leave their wife and children and go to the forest. How can the peaceful
varnasrama-dharma be revived when people are so harassed in this age?
It is virtually impossible. Therefore the system of bhakti-yoga, the
chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, should be adopted. The whole
aim of bhakti-yoga is to satisfy Visnu. Yajfaih sarkirtana-prdayaih:
Visnu, Krsna, came Himself as Caitanya Mahaprabhu to teach us the way
of sartkirtana. Presently it has become fashionable to manufacture a new
system of religion, but Kapiladeva, like Krsna, does not manufacture
98 Teachings of Lord Kapila

anything new. This system is not new, but very old (pura). Krsna also
says the same in Bhagavad-gita (4.2), evarh parampard-praéptam imam
rdjarsayo viduh: “This supreme science was thus received through the
chain of disciplic succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that
way. Thus Krsna and Kapiladeva are not teaching anything new. They
are simply repeating the same message because, in the course of time, the
knowledge has been lost. Arjuna asks, **Why are you telling me? Why
not another?” Sri Krsna answers, bhakto ’si me sakha ceti: ““Because you
are My devotee as well as My friend.” (Bg. 4.3)

Thus without being a bhakta, a devotee of Krsna’s, one cannot actually
understand the science of bhakti-yoga. Understanding Bhagavad-gita
means understanding Krsna. All this information is explained only in the
bhakti-sampradaya, not in any other school. Therefore Krsna says at the
conclusion of Bhagavad-gita (18.55), bhaktyad mam abhidnati: if one
actually wants to understand Krsna and one’s relationship with Him, one
must take to this process of bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga as explained by
Lord Kapiladeva is sdrikhya-yoga.

Lord Kapiladeva states here:

tam imam te pravaksyami
yam avocam purdnaghe

The word anaghe refers to one without sin. The word agha refers to past
sins, and an means “‘without.”’ Therefore one cannot understand Krsna
consciousness unless he is free from sin. Yesam tv anta-gatam pdpam:
one can stick to Krsna consciousness only when one is completely free
from all sinful reactions. One may say, ““That will take some time. I cannot get free from sinful reactions overnight.’ However, Krsna says, “No,
no. This can be done immediately. Simply surrender unto Me, and I will
absolve you from all sin.” Thus by simply surrendering unto Krsna, our
spiritual life begins.

We have to understand that we receive different bodies due to our sinful actions. Now we are given a chance to execute our duty in the human
form. Bahiindm janmandm ante. We have received this body through
the evolutionary processes, and this human form is a great opportunity.
Narottama dasa Thakura sings: hari hari viphale janama gondinu: “My
dear Lord Krsna, | have simply wasted my time.” Why?
Bhakti-yoga: The Supreme Yoga System 99

manusya-janama pdiyd, rddhd-krsna na bhajiya,
Janiya Ssuniyd visa khainu

“Because I have received the human form of life, which is meant for
understanding Krsna, yet I have simply wasted my time by not taking
advantage of this opportunity. I have done everything but worship Radha-Krsna. Therefore I have taken poison knowingly.” When one
takes poison knowingly, he commits suicide, and not taking advantage of
the human form is something like that. If we do not understand Krsna in
this life, we are knowingly taking poison. This material life is just like a
blazing forest fire. Eating, sleeping, enjoying sex and defending are the
main material activities. When we are engaged simply in these things,
our hearts are always burning as if we had taken poison. How can we be
cured?
golokera prema-dhana, _hari-naéma-sankirtana,
rati nad janmila kene taya

‘My dear Lord, You have given us the medicine of hari-ndmasarnkirtana, the chanting of Hare Krsna. Unfortunately, I have no attraction for Your holy names.”’ It is also stated:

vrajendra-nandana yei, _Saci-suta haila sei,
balarama haila nitdi

‘Krsna has now come as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the son of mother
Saci. And Balarama has come as Lord Nityananda.” What is Their business? They are delivering all kinds of sinful men simply by chanting
Hare Krsna. And what is the evidence of this? The evidence is that Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda Prabhu delivered the sinful Jagai
and Madhai. At the present moment everyone is like Jagai and Madhii,
for everyone is intoxicated and mad after sex. Now, by the grace of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, thousands of Jagdis and Madhdais are being
delivered. It is this active medicine, this Hare Krsna mahd-mantra, that
is doing it. It is the perfect yoga system. This process is not manufactured, and we have not concocted anything. Our business is simply to accept the words of Krsna as they are. Sri Krsna Himself characterizes His
devotee in this way:
100 Teachings of Lord Kapila

satatam kirtayanto mam
yatantas ca drdha-vratah

namasyantas ca mam bhaktya
nitya-yuktad updsate

‘Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination,
bowing down before Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me with
devotion.” (Bg. 9.14)

We do not need to be very learned. Our only requirement is that we
receive the blessings of the Lord. The Lord’s blessings will enable us to
become learned and follow His instructions. We only need to stick to this
Krsna consciousness movement on the basis of Bhagavad-gita. When we
are a little further advanced, we can read Srimad-Bhagavatam. Caitanya
Mahaprabhu Himself has opened the way with this sarkirtana movement. The entire world is in darkness without Krsna consciousness, and
in this age people are so dull that they do not even know the difference
between mukti (liberation) and bandha (bondage). If a human being
does not know this difference, he is no better than an animal.

Presently we are under the sway of the three gunas, the modes of material nature —sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-guna. Out of these three
gunas, sattva-guna, the mode of goodness, is the best. A brdhmana,
characterized by the mode of goodness, is truthful and self-controlled.
He controls his mind and senses, and he is very tolerant and simple. He
has full knowledge, and he knows how to apply knowledge in life. He has
full faith in the authority of the Vedas, a quality called dstikyam.
Caitanya Mahaprabhu has explained the difference between nadstikyam
and dstikyam. According to Vedic understanding, one who does not
believe in the Vedas is called ndstika. Caitanya Mahaprabhu says: veda
nad maniya bauddha haya ta’ nastika (Cc. Madhya 6.168). Lord Buddha
defied Vedic authority, but His mission was to stop animal killing. In the
Vedas there are recommendations for animal sacrifice, and therefore to
prevent the killing of animals, Lord Buddha rejected the Vedas. Such
sacrifice is not possible in this age because there is no brahmana
qualified to carry it out. Those who are intelligent know that such a
sacrifice cannot be successful in this age because no one knows the
proper mantras capable of giving an old animal the body of a new
animal. When an animal sacrifice is properly conducted, an old animal is
Bhakti-yoga: The Supreme Yoga System 101

sacrificed, and it emerges from the fire in a new body. This is not possible in this age, but what is possible is sarkirtana-yajiia, the chanting of
the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. This is the yajfia, or sacrifice, especially
intended for this age. We need only chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare. By performing this yajfia, the results will be ceto-darpanamarjanam—the mirror of the mind will be cleansed. When the mirror of
the mind is cleansed, one is automatically liberated.

Consciousness is the main principle, either for conditional life or for
liberated life. We are therefore proposing Krsna consciousness, which
means liberation from the repetition of birth and death. Unfortunately,
people are so dull in this age that they have no idea how birth and death
can be stopped. They think that birth and death cannot be stopped; even
famous scientists admit this. However, in Bhagavad-gita Sri Krsna says
that we should always keep in mind the four miserable conditions. These
are birth, old age, disease and death. When we are able to put an end to
these, we are liberated. This simply requires that we clear our consciousness by thinking of Krsna. The purpose of this Krsna consciousness
movement is to keep our minds constantly on Krsna. Krsna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He is a person. When He was
realized by Arjuna, He was addressed as purusam. God is purusa, male,
not female. Purusa means “‘the enjoyer,” and prakrti means “‘the enjoyed.” Everything is enjoyed by the supreme purusa. It is also stated
that we are actually prakrti, not purusa. The human dress is simply
may4d, illusion. We are thinking that we are purusa, the enjoyer, but actually we are the enjoyed. A man, thinking of enjoying himself, tries to
imitate purusa, but actually he is prakrti. As a consequence, he is cast
into this material world. Because the living entity wants to enjoy the material world and is attached to the three gunas, he receives different
types of bodies. One who is in the mode of goodness receives the body of
a learned brdhmana. This is somewhat elevated, for he can gradually
understand what is God. In the modes of passion and ignorance, no one
can understand God. Also, from the material point of view, if one is situated in the mode of goodness, he can be elevated to higher planetary
systems. Nonetheless, even if one goes to Brahmaloka, the highest planet
in the material atmosphere, one is not actually perfectly situated. There
is really no benefit because even on Brahmaloka the four miseries of
102 Teachings of Lord Kapila

material existence are found: birth, old age, disease and death. Lord
Brahmi also dies and takes birth. From Vedic literatures we understand
that Lord Brahma took birth from the lotus flower generated from the
navel of Visnu. Thus he had his birth, and when Lord Brahma dies, the
entire material cosmic manifestation will be finished. Just as Lord
Brahma undergoes birth, old age, disease and death, so also a small ant or
insect undergoes the same process. The point is that the living entity has
to be free from this bondage because he is by nature eternal. According
to Bhagavad-gitd, the living entity never actually takes birth, and he
never actually dies. Na jayate mriyate va kadacit: ‘For the soul there is
never birth nor death.”’ (Bg. 2.20)

It is the body that is destined to die, whether the body be that of Lord
Brahma or of a small ant. One should not think that one is liberated because one can live millions and millions of years. The life of Lord
Brahma covers millions of earth years, yet he is also subjected to birth
and death. That is the way of conditional life. We should take advantage
of the perfect knowledge given by Vedic literatures, by the great rsis and
Bhagavan Kapiladeva, as well as by Bhagavan Sri Krsna, in order to attain liberation from the cycle of birth and death.

Receiving Krsna consciousness means receiving light. People are exhausted with the materialistic way of life, especially in the West. Now the
Krsna consciousness movement is giving new life to Western society. By
nature, we living entities are liberated. There is actually no question of
birth, death, old age and disease. Since we are part and parcel of Krsna,
the Supreme Lord, how can there be a question of these things? Krsna is
sac-cid-dnanda-vigraha, and being part and parcel of Krsna, we are also
of the same nature. We are equal in quality, although not in quantity.
Why, then, should we suffer the pangs of death? Therefore in the previous verse Kapiladeva instructed: yoga ddhyatmikah pumsam mato
nihsreyasdya. The soul is entrapped in the body, and the process of perfect yoga is the process of saving the soul from bodily confinement and
the four miseries that plague the body. How can this perfect yoga be attained? That is explained by Lord Kapila in the next verse: ratam va
pumsi muktaye. If our consciousness is simply attached to Krsna, we will
be liberated.

The great souls are always chanting about Krsna. Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Bhakti-yoga: The Supreme Yoga System 103

Hare Hare. They are also endeavoring with great determination in their
devotional service. For instance, in the Krsna consciousness temples the
devotees rise early in the morning, at 4:00 A.M., and they immediately
bathe. Then they go to mavigala-arati at 4:30, and after margala-drati
they study the Vedic literatures. These are the processes by which we can
awaken our dormant love for Krsna. Because we are part and parcel of
Krsna—just as a son is part and parcel of his father—there is a natural
love between us. However, somehow or other the son leaves home and
forgets his father. The father, of course, never forgets his son. He
thinks, “Oh, my son has left. If he would only come back!” Krsna thinks
in this way. We are all sons of Krsna, and Krsna is more anxious to get us
back home, back to Godhead, than we are to go. Therefore Krsna comes
and says, “You rascal! Give up all this nonsensical material engagement.
You have manufactured so many religions and dharmas. Just give them
all up and simply surrender unto Me.”’ Krsna comes Himself and leaves
behind His words. His words are also Himself because His words are absolute. Presently we do not see Krsna, but if we actually advance, we will
see Him. When we see the Deity in the temple, we think, “Oh, this is an
idol. It is not Krsna.”’ If we think in this way, we have not seen Krsna.
Krsna is also present in His words, in Bhagavad-gitd. That is krsna-vani,
the message of Krsna. The stage of awareness of Krsna can be attained
when one is advanced in Krsna consciousness. Then one can understand
that Krsna is present in the Deity, in Bhagavad-gita, in the taste of
water, in the sunshine, in the moonshine and in all sound. Krsna is present everywhere, but one has to acquire knowledge in order to know how
to see Krsna. That is mukti, liberation. That is Krsna consciousness. That
is also the process of Obhakti-yoga—sravanam kirtanam visnoh
smaranam.... Deity worship is arcanam, chanting is vandanam, and
ddsyam is working for Krsna and spreading this Krsna consciousness
movement.

Generally we experience that people are primarily interested in seeing
Krsna, but why is the emphasis on seeing? Let us hear about Him. We
must come with a little faith, and as we hear, that faith will increase. One
should come to the temple, listen to talks about Krsna, and then, after
some time, officially take initiation into the service of the Lord. That is
called bhajana-kriyd. At that time one has to abandon illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling. If one is still attached to all these
104 Teachings of Lord Kapila

habits, he should know that he is not making progress. When one is actually advanced in bhajana-kriyd, all these anarthas (unwanted things)
will be finished. Param drstva nivartate. When one appreciates something better, he rejects all kinds of nonsense. Once one gets a taste of
Krsna consciousness, he cannot remain without it. A drunkard cannot
remain without a drink, but a devotee is drunk with Krsna consciousness. The immunization against all material diseases is this Krsna consciousness. To be immuned to the infection of the gunas, we have to
engage in bhakti-yoga. Once we attain the perfectional stage, we attain
ecstatic love of Godhead. In that state we cannot remain without Krsna
for a moment. That is called bhdva, and that bhdva may increase to
mahd-bhdva. This is not possible for ordinary human beings, but it was
possible for the gopis and Radharani. Indeed, they could not live without
Krsna. This is the highest stage of liberation.
CHAPTER NINE

Purifying the Mind for Self-realization

TEXT 15

cetah khalv asya bandhaya
muktaye cdtmano matam

gunesu saktam bandhaya
ratam vad pumsi muktaye

TRANSLATION

The stage in which the consciousness of the living entity is attracted by the three modes of material nature is called conditional
life. But when that same consciousness is attached to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, one is situated in the consciousness of
liberation.

PURPORT

There is a distinction here between Krsna consciousness and mdyd
consciousness. Gunesu, or mayd consciousness, involves attachment to
the three material modes of nature, under which one works sometimes in
goodness and knowledge, sometimes in passion and sometimes in ignorance. These different qualitative activities, with the central attachment for material enjoyment, are the cause of one’s conditional life.
When the same cetah, or consciousness, is transferred to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, or when one becomes Krsna conscious,
he is on the path of liberation.

TEXT 16

aham-mamabhimanotthath

kama-lobhaddibhir malaih

105

 
106 Teachings of Lord Kapila

vitam yada manah suddham
aduhkham asukham samam

TRANSLATION

When one is completely cleansed of the impurities of lust and
greed produced from the false identification of the body as “‘I’’
and bodily possessions as “‘mine,”’ one’s mind becomes purified.
In that pure state he transcends the stage of material happiness and
distress.

PURPORT

Kama and lobha are the symptoms of material existence. Everyone always desires to possess something. It is said here that desire and greed
are the products of false identification of oneself with the body. When
one becomes free from this contamination, his mind and consciousness
also become freed and attain their original state. Mind, consciousness and
the living entity exist. Whenever we speak of the living entity, this includes the mind and consciousness. The difference between conditional
life and liberated life occurs when we purify the mind and the consciousness. When they are purified, one becomes transcendental to material
happiness and distress.

In the beginning Lord Kapila has said that perfect yoga enables one to
transcend the platform of material distress and happiness. How this can
be done is explained here: one has to purify his mind and consciousness.
This can be done by the bhakti-yoga system. As explained in the
Ndrada-pafcardtra, one’s mind and senses should be purified (tatparatvena nirmalam). One’s senses must be engaged in devotional
service of the Lord. That is the process. The mind must have some
engagement. One cannot make the mind vacant. Of course there are
some foolish attempts to try to make the mind vacant or void, but that is
not possible. The only process that will purify the mind is to engage it in
Krsna. The mind must be engaged. If we engage our mind in Krsna,
naturally the consciousness becomes fully purified, and there is no
chance that material desire and greed will enter.

Our mind is our friend, and our mind is our enemy. If it is cleansed, it
is a friend, and if it is dirty, we contact material diseases. If we keep ourPurifying the Mind for Self-realization 107

selves clean, pure, we will not be contaminated. According to Vedic
civilization, one has to cleanse himself externally three times daily—once
in the morning, again at noon, and again in the evening. Those who
strictly follow the brahminical rules and regulations follow this process.
Cleanliness is next to godliness. Conditional life means that the mind is
covered with dirty things, and this is our disease. When we are in the
lower modes of tamo-guna and rajo-guna, these dirty things are very
prominent. One has to raise himself to the mode of sattva (goodness) by
the process of sarikirtana and Sravana. One has to hear krsna-katha.
Krsna is within everyone’s heart. The individual soul is part and parcel
of Krsna, and Krsna wants the individual soul to turn to Him. Unfortunately the conditioned soul is attached to material enjoyment, and this
is the cause of his bondage to birth, death, old age and disease. He is so
foolish that he does not take into consideration that these miseries are repeated. He is like an ass that belongs to a washerman who loads him
down with heavy clothes. For a few morsels of grass, the ass has to carry
heavy loads all day, although not a single piece of clothing belongs to
him. This is the way of the karmis. They may become big
multimillionaires, but they are just like asses, working hard day and
night. Regardless of how much money they may have, their stomachs can
only hold so much. And they require only six feet of space to sleep.
Nonetheless, these big karmis are thinking themselves very important.
They think, ‘Without me, all the members of my nation will die. Let me
work day and night to the point of death.’’ People are thinking, ““I belong
to this family, this nation, this community. I have this duty or that
duty,’ and so on. People do not know that these are all false designations.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore enjoins, jivera ‘svariipa’ haya—
krsnera ‘nitya-ddsa’: our actual position is that of eternal servants of
Krsna. We are mistakenly thinking that we are servants of a family or
nation, but this is due to ignorance, tamo-guna. However, we can attain
the platform of sattva-guna by following the instructions given in
Bhagavad-gitd. Hearing krsna-kathd, topics about Krsna, clears all the
dirty things from the mind. Also, if we chant and dance, these dirty
things will be wiped away. The mind is the cause of bondage, and the
mind is the cause of liberation. When it is dirty, it brings about bondage.
In conditional life, we take birth, remain for some time, and enjoy
or suffer. But really there is no question of enjoyment. There is only
108 Teachings of Lord Kapila

suffering. When we die, we have to give up the body and then take on
another body. We immediately enter the womb of another mother, stay
for nine months or so, and then come out. Then a new chapter of life
begins. This is conditioned life, and it goes on again and again and again.
In this way we undergo the tribulations of birth, old age, disease and
death. The dogs and cats cannot understand this process, but we can
understand it in human life through the Vedic literatures. If we don’t
take advantage of these literatures, all our education is for nothing.
People actually waste their time talking politics, sociology, anthropology, and so on. They read many literatures that do not glorify the
Supreme Lord Hari, and thus they waste their time. This Krsna consclousness movement is giving everyone a chance to become pious.
Punya-sravana-kirtanah. It is not necessary to give money or bathe in
the Ganges. There are many pious activities and many processes recommended in the Sdstras for becoming pious. However, in Kali-yuga people
have lost all their stamina. They are so sinful that there is no question of
becoming pious through all these prescribed methods. The only means is
hearing about Krsna and chanting His names. Krsna has given us ears to
hear and a tongue to speak. We can hear from a realized soul and thus
perfect our lives. In this way we are given a chance to purify ourselves.
Unless we are purified, we cannot become devotees. Human life is meant
for purification. Unfortunately in this age people are not interested in
Krsna, and they suffer through material existence one life after another
after another. In one life they may be very opulent. Then they don’t care
about the next life. They think, ““Let me eat, drink and be merry.” This
is going on all over the world, but the Sdstras say that people are making
mistakes in this way. Ninam pramattah kurute vikarmah (Bhag. 5.5.4):
people have become mad with sense gratification, and therefore they
engage in all sorts of forbidden things. Karma means regulated work,
and vikarma means just the opposite—unlawful, forbidden activities.
The word akarma means that one is not affected by the results of work.

As stated in Bhagavad-gita (3.9):

yajnarthat karmano ‘nyatra
loko ’yarh karma-bandhanah

tad-artham karma kaunteya
mukta-sarnigah samdcara
Purifying the Mind for Self-realization 109

‘Work done as a sacrifice for Visnu has to be performed, otherwise work
binds one to this material world. Therefore, O son of Kunti, perform
your prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you will always remain unattached and free from bondage.”

When people are in the modes of passion and ignorance, they perform
vikarma. They do not care for their future lives, and they are habituated
to eating anything and everything, just like hogs. They do not care for
the sastric injunctions, and they are totally irresponsible. They are just
like street boys who have no education and do not care for anything.
Such urchins do whatever they like, for their fathers and mothers do not
care for them. Life in ignorance, tamo-guna, is such a careless life.
People simply act unlawfully, not considering the results of their actions.
They act for sense gratification, and actually they take pleasure in committing sins. In Calcutta I have seen people taking pleasure in cutting the
throats of chickens and laughing when the chicken jumps and flaps
about. Sometimes in Western countries students are taken to
slaughterhouses just to see how the cows are butchered. In this age,
people take pleasure in committing all kinds of sins. They have no brains
to see that this body is temporary and full of suffering. They are completely in the mode of darkness, just like the animals they slaughter.
There may be many animals in a pasture, and if one takes an animal
aside and cuts its throat, the other animals will simply stand, look, and
continue eating grass. They do not realize that the next time they may be
slaughtered. The people in Kali-yuga are in the same situation, but the
Krsna consciousness movement is trying to give these rascals a little
sense. We are saying, “Don’t remain animals. Become human beings.”’
In the words of Caitanya Mahaprabhu:

krsna bhuli’ sei jiva anddi-bahirmukha
ataeva maya tare deya samsdra-duhkha

“Forgetting Krsna, the living entity has been attracted by the
external feature from time immemorial. Therefore the illusory energy
(maya) gives him all kinds of misery in his material existence.
(Cc. Madhya 20.117) When one forgets his relationship with Krsna, he
acts in a very foolish way, and mdyd gives him one misery after another.
It is also stated:
110 Teachings of Lord Kapila

mayd-mugdha jivera nahi svatah krsna-jidna
Jivere krpdya kaila krsna veda-purana

‘The conditioned soul cannot revive his Krsna consciousness by his own
effort. But out of causeless mercy, Lord Krsna compiled the Vedic
literature and its supplements, the Purdnas.”’ (Cc. Madhya 20.122)
The Vedic literatures—the Vedanta, Upanisads, Ramayana, Mahabhaérata and many others—should be utilized if we wish to become free
from the contamination of tamo-guna and rajo-guna. The whole world is
revolving due to kdma and lobha. Kama means “‘lusty desire,” and
lobha means “greed.” People cannot have enough sex or money, and because of this, their hearts are filled with contaminations, which have to
be cleansed by hearing, repeating and chanting. Human life is meant to
get rid of anarthas, unwanted things, but where is the university or college where this science of purification is taught? The only institution is
this Krsna consciousness society. Krsna is within the heart, and the contaminations are also there, but Krsna will help us cleanse them. Nastaprayesv abhadresu nityarh bhagavata-sevaya (Bhag. 1.2.18). We must
regularly hear Srimad-Bhagavatam and chant Hare Krsna; these are the
two processes recommended by Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Haridasa Thakura
was chanting three hundred thousand holy names a day, but we have
fixed the number at sixteen rounds. Nonetheless, we are so unfortunate
and fallen that we cannot even perform them. We should not waste our
time reading and talking nonsense, but should engage in the study of
Srimad-Bhagavatam. Our time is very valuable, and we should not waste
it. Canakya Pandita has said: dyusah ksana eko ‘pi na labhyah svarnakotibhih. We may live for a hundred years, but not one moment of these
hundred years can be returned, not even if we are prepared to pay
millions of dollars. We cannot add a moment, nor can we get a moment
back. If time is money, we should just consider how much money we
have lost. However, time is even more precious because it cannot be
regained. Therefore not a single moment should be lost. Human life
should be utilized only for chanting and reading Vedic literatures. The
International Society for Krishna Consciousness is publishing many
books so that people can utilize their time properly by reading them and
make their lives successful. Not only should we read SrimadBhagavatam, but we should also serve the person bhagavata, one whose
Purifying the Mind for Self-realization 111

life is nothing but Srimad-Bhagavatam. Nityarh bhagavata-sevayd. By
this process we can attain the stage of bhagavad-bhakti, but first we must
get rid of all these anarthas, unwanted things. Presently we are wasting
our time thinking, “This is my country. This is my nation. This is my
body and my family,” and so on. Nityam bhagavata-sevayd. We can
vanquish all these false conceptions when we come to the platform of
sattva-guna. Then we will not be disturbed by tamo-guna or rajo-guna,
nor by kdma or lobha (lust and greed). This is the vasudeva platform.
Om namo bhagavate vdsudevéya.

Lord Kapiladeva, in the next verse, points out the results that follow
the successful completion of this purificatory process.

TEXT 17

tadaé purusa Gtmadnam
kevalam prakrteh param

nirantaram svayam-yjyotir
animdnam akhanditam

TRANSLATION

At that time the soul can see himself to be transcendental to material existence and always self-effulgent, never fragmented, although very minute in size.

PURPORT

In the state of pure consciousness, or Krsna consciousness, one can see
himself as a minute particle nondifferent from the Supreme Lord. As
stated in Bhagavad-gitd, the jiva, or the individual soul, is eternally part
and parcel of the Supreme Lord. Just as the sun’s rays are minute particles of the brilliant sun, so a living entity is a minute particle of the
Supreme Spirit. The individual soul and the Supreme Lord are not separated as in material differentiation. The individual soul is a particle from
the very beginning. One should not think that because the individual
soul is a particle, it is fragmented from the whole spirit. Mayavada philosophy enunciates that the whole spirit exists, but a part of it, which is
112 Teachings of Lord Kapila

called the jiva, is entrapped by illusion. This philosophy, however, is
unacceptable because spirit cannot be divided like a fragment of matter.
That part, the jiva, is eternally a part. As long as the Supreme Spirit exists, His part and parcel also exists. As long as the sun exists, the
molecules of the sun’s rays also exist.

The jiva particle is estimated in the Vedic literature to be one
ten-thousandth the size of the upper portion of a hair. He is therefore infinitesimal. The Supreme Spirit is infinite, but the living entity, or individual soul, is infinitesimal, although he is not different in quality
from the Supreme Spirit.

Two words in this verse are to be particularly noted. One is
nirantaram, which means “‘nondifferent”’ or “‘of the same quality.” The
individual soul is also expressed here as animdnam. Animdnam means
“infinitesimal.” The Supreme Spirit is all-pervading, but the very small
spirit is the individual soul. Akhanditam means not exactly “fragmented” but “constitutionally always infinitesimal.” No one can separate
the molecular parts of the sunshine from the sun, but at the same time
the molecular part of the sunshine is not as expansive as the sun itself.
Similarly, the living entity, by his constitutional position, is qualitatively
the same as the Supreme Spirit, but he is infinitesimal.

Self-realization means seeing one’s proper identity as the infinitesimal
Jiva. At the present moment, we are seeing the body, but this is not our
proper identity. We have no vision of the real person occupying the body.
The first lesson we receive from Bhagavad-gita (2.13) informs us that
the body and the owner of the body are different. When we can understand that we are not the body, that is the beginning of self-realization,
and that is called the brahma-bhita stage. Aham brahmasmi. I am not
this material body, but spirit soul. And what are the characteristics of the
Jiva, the soul? First of all, he is animdnam, very minute, infinitesimal.
We are also jyoti, effulgent, like God, but God is brahma-jyoti, allpervading and infinite. According to the Maydvada theory, we are the
same as that brahmajyoti. Mayavadis give the example of a pot and the
sky. Outside the pot there is sky, and within the pot there is sky. The
separation is only due to the wall of the pot. When the pot is broken, the
inside and outside become one. However, this example does not properly

apply to the soul, as it is described in Bhagavad-gita (2.24):
Purifying the Mind for Self-realization 113

acchedyo ’yam adahyo ’yam
akledyo ’Sosya eva ca

nityah sarva-gatah sthanur
acalo *yam sanatanah

‘This individual soul is unbreakable and insoluble, and can be neither
burned nor dried. He is Ev eniestitig, all-pervading, unchangeable, immovable and eternally the same.” The Soul cannot be cut in pieces or
segmented. This means that the soul is eternally, perpetually minute. We
are the eternal parts and parcels of Sri Krsna. As Sri Krsna Himself states

in Bhagavad-gita (15.7):

mamaivamso jiva-loke
Jiva-bhitah sanaétanah

“The living entities in the conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental
parts.” The word sandtana means “‘eternal,’”’ and the word amsa means
““particles.’’ God, Krsna, is very great. No one is equal to Him or greater
than Him. It is said that God is great, but we do not actually realize how
great God is. He is so great that millions of universes are emanating from

the pores of His body.

yasyaika-nisvasita-kalam athavalambya
jivanti loma-vilaja jagad-anda-nathah

visnur mahaén sa iha yasya kald-viseso
govindam ddi-purusam tam aham bhajami

‘The Brahmas and other lords of the mundane worlds appear from the
pores of the Maha-Visnu and remain alive for the duration of His one exhalation. I adore the primeval Lord, Govinda, for Maha-Visnu is a portion of His plenary portion.” (Brahma-samhitd 5.48)

Millions of universes emanate from the breathing of the Maha-Visnu.
In the Tenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, Krsna gives Arjuna some indication of His infinite glory, and He concludes His descriptions with the
following statement (Bg. 10.42):
114 Teachings of Lord Kapila

athava bahunaitena
kim jiidtena tavarjuna
vistabhyadham idam krtsnam
ekdmsena sthito jagat

‘But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a
single fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.”

This universe (jagat) is situated on the strength of one part of Krsna’s
yogic powers. In this way we must understand the greatness of God and
our own identity as minute particles. It is stated in the Purdnas that the
individual soul is one ten-thousandth part of the tip of a hair. If we could
somehow divide the tip of a hair into ten thousand parts, we might begin
to understand how the soul is invisible. Self-realization means knowing
our identity as small particles. The small particle of spirit soul is within
every one of us, but it is not possible to see with material eyes. There is
no instrument existing in the material universe by which one can actually see the soul. Because of our inability to perceive the soul, we say it
is nirdkdra, formless. We cannot even calculate its dimension (dkdra).
Although we cannot calculate it, it is there nonetheless. The living entity
has full form. There are small microbes and insects we can barely see,
but they have an anatomy consisting of many working parts. Within a
small insect there is also the spirit soul, and that spirit soul also exists
within the elephant and other big animals.

When we actually realize our identity as Brahman, our life becomes
successful. Presently we are identifying with the body, but as long as we
do so, we are no better than cats and dogs, although we may have a considerable amount of scientific knowledge. Conditioned souls consider the
body to be the self, and because of this the jivas identify themselves as
American, Indian, brahmana, ksatriya, man, woman, elephant and so
forth. Thinking in these bodily terms, people consider their wives and
children to be theirs and the land of their birth to be worshipable.
Thinking thus, people are willing to fight and die for their country. Presently everyone is laboring under this delusion, but in order to understand our spiritual identity, we must find the proper guru.

Realizing our identity means realizing that we are Krsna’s eternal
parts and parcels, that we are very minute, infinitesimal, and that we
Purifying the Mind for Self-realization 115

have a perpetual and eternal relationship with Krsna, just as a part has
its relationship to the whole. At no time can we be as great as Krsna, although we are the same qualitatively. No one is equal to God, and no one
is greater than Him. If someone claims to be God, he has to prove that no
one is equal to him and that no one is greater. If he can do this, he is God.
This is a very simple definition. Brahma-samhita (5.1) also verifies this
statement: isvarah paramah krsnah. The word isvara means “‘controller,”’ and the word parama means “‘supreme.”’ We small living entities are controllers to a degree. We can control, at times, our family
members, wives, children and so forth. Or we can control our office,
factory, country or whatever. There are small controllers and larger controllers. If we go to Brahmi, we see that he is controlling the entire universe, but he is not the supreme controller. It is stated in the sdstras that
Brahmi, the greatest living being within this universe, is also meditating
in order to learn how to control. Tene brahma hrdd ya ddi-kavaye
(Bhag. 1.1.1).

First of all, Brahma learned to control the universe; then he became
qualified as Brahma. Although he was born Brahma, he still had to be
educated. If he was the first living being in the universe, who educated
him? Krsna. Sri Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (10.2), aham ddir hi
devdnam: “I am the source of the demigods.”’

The original demigods are Brahma, Visnu and Siva. Lord Krsna is
Visnu, but He is the instructor of Brahma and Siva. Therefore it is said
that Lord Krsna is the source of all the demigods.

We should not foolishly claim that we are as great as the Supreme God.
We should understand that we are like sparks of the original fire. The
spark is also fire, but if it falls from the original flame, it will go out. One
should not think that because he is qualitatively one with God, he is God.
One may be an isvara, a controller, but one cannot be isvarah paramah,
the supreme controller. It is very fashionable nowadays to claim to have
become Narayana, God. The Mayavadis address one another as Narayana,
and thus everyone supposedly becomes Narayana. In this way we are
overcrowded with Nardyanas here and there. But how can everyone become Narayana? Narayana is one, and the Sdstras warn:

yas tu naérdyanam devam
brahma-rudrddi-devataih
116 Teachings of Lord Kapila

samatvenaiva vikseta

sa pdsandi bhaved dhruvam

‘Whoever thinks Lord Visnu and the demigods are on the same level is
to be immediately considered a rogue as far as spiritual understanding is
concerned.” If one compares Narayana to the demigods, he simply
reveals his lack of intelligence. It is also fashionable to speak of daridranardyana, poor Narayana, claiming that the poor man in the street is
Narayana. But what is this nonsense? Narayana is the exalted Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Even Sankaracarya says: nérayanah paro ’vyaktat. Narayana is beyond this universe. Avyaktdd anda-sambhavah: the
entire universe is a product of this avyakta. We should not compare
Narayana to anyone, what to speak of the poor man in the street
(daridra). This is all foolishness. Narayana is Laksmipati, the husband
and controller of the goddess of fortune. How, then, can He be daridra?
This is all due to misunderstanding. Therefore the Sdstras warn that if
one thinks that the demigods are equal to Narayana, one is a pdsandi, an
atheist. We should not think that because we have become liberated, we
have attained the position of Narayana. By severe austerity and penance
one may elevate himself to the position of Brahman, but this is not
the position of Parabrahman. Aruhya krcchrena param padam tatah
(Bhag. 10.2.32). Although one rises to the platform of Brahman, one
again falls down to the material position if he neglects to worship the
lotus feet of Krsna. One may rise to the Brahma effulgence, but because
there is no shelter there one will return to the material atmosphere. One
may go to Brahmaloka, the highest planet in the material sky, but one’s
position there is temporary. However, in the paravyoma, the spiritual
sky, there are many spiritual planets, called Vaikunthalokas. There are
millions of these gigantic planets, and unless we take shelter of one of
them, we will fall down again into the material atmosphere.

It is not sufficient to rise to the platform of Brahman. Brahman is sat
(being), and a partial realization of the Absolute Truth. We are actually
after dnanda. Sac-cid-dnanda: cit means “‘knowledge,”’ and that is also
partial. We must add dnanda (bliss) in order to have complete realization. If we simply fly in the sky, we can’t have dnanda. We have to
descend to an airport at some time or another. If we simply rise to the
Brahman effulgence, we do not experience dnanda. Ananda is exPurifying the Mind for Self-realization 117

perienced when we enter the spiritual planets, where Narayana, Krsna,
is present. Paras tasmat tu bhadvo ‘nyo ’vyakto ’vyaktdt sandtanah
(Bg. 8.20). We have to enter the eternal planets and associate with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in order to be happy. If we do not attain
this position, we will return to the material world. And how can this position be attained? We simply have to try to understand Krsna. Why does
He come? What is His business? What is His form?

The purpose of this Krsna consciousness movement is to teach people
how to understand Krsna. If one is fortunate in understanding Him,
one’s life is successful. As long as we have lusty desires and greed, we
cannot come to this understanding. The bhakti-yoga process is the process of purification whereby we can become free from kdma and lobha,
lust and greed, and the influence of the lower gunas, tamo-guna and
rajo-guna, ignorance and passion. As soon as we engage in devotional
service, we immediately become freed from the influence of the gunas.
Because we are not expert in approaching the Supreme Lord, we have to
follow the principles of bhakti-yoga enunciated by the dcdryas. When a
boy goes to school, he has to follow the rules and regulations, but after a
while he becomes accustomed to them and does not have to be taught. In
other words, he learns automatically to come to school at a certain time,
take his seat and study nicely. Similarly, in this Krsna consciousness
movement, we have certain rules and regulations. We must rise early in
the morning for marigala-drati, chant sixteen rounds of Hare Krsna
daily, and execute all the functions of bhakti-yoga. In this way, we become attached to rendering service to Krsna, and we become practiced in
this science. When we attain this stage, we immediately become
self-realized.
CHAPTER TEN

Spiritual Attachment
and Material Detachment

TEXT 18

Jfidna-vairdgya-yuktena
bhakti-yuktena céatmana

paripasyaty uddsinam
prakrtim ca hataujasam

TRANSLATION

In that position of self-realization, by practice of knowledge and
renunciation in devotional service, one sees everything in the
right perspective; he becomes indifferent to material existence,
and the material influence acts less powerfully upon him.

PURPORT

As the contamination of the germs of a particular disease can influence
a weaker person, similarly the influence of material nature, or illusory
energy, can act on the weaker, or conditioned, soul but not on the liberated soul. Self-realization is the position of the liberated state. One
understands his constitutional position by knowledge and vairagya,
renunciation. Without knowledge, one cannot have realization. The
realization that one is the infinitesimal part and parcel of the Supreme
Spirit makes one unattached to material, conditional life. That is the
beginning of devotional service. Unless one is liberated from material
contamination, one cannot engage in the devotional service of the Lord.
In this verse, therefore, it is stated, jfidna-vairdgya-yuktena: when one
is in full knowledge of one’s constitutional position and is in the

119
120 Teachings of Lord Kapila

renounced order of life, detached from material attraction, then, by pure
devotional service, bhakti-yuktena, he can engage himself as a loving
servant of the Lord. Paripasyati means that he can see everything in its
right perspective. Then the influence of material nature becomes almost
nil. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gitad. Brahma-bhitah prasanndtma: when one is self-realized he becomes happy and free from the influence of material nature, and at that time he is freed from lamentation
and hankering. The Lord states that position as mad-bhaktim labhate
pardm, the real beginning of devotional service. Similarly, it is confirmed in the Ndrada-pajicaratra that when the senses are purified, they
can then be engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. One who is attached to material contamination cannot be a devotee.

In the conditional state, we are influenced by material nature. We have
already discussed how we are conditioned by the three modes of material
nature—ignorance, passion and goodness. Goodness is superior to ignorance and passion because from the platform of goodness we can come
to understand Krsna and thereby transcend the modes altogether. In this
age, people are generally influenced by the lower modes, the modes of ignorance and passion. In these modes, we are not able to serve Krsna. It is
our constitutional position to serve someone, but when we do not serve
Krsna, we serve maya. In any case, we cannot become master. Who can
say that he is a master, that he is not serving anyone? We may serve our
family, society, country, business, automobile or whatever. If one cannot
find anything to serve, he goes and buys a cat or dog and serves it. Why
is this? It is because service is our nature. We are simply lacking the
knowledge of where to direct the service. Service is meant to be rendered
to Krsna. In the material world we are serving our lusty desires, not
Krsna, and we are deriving no pleasure from this. We are also serving in
an office or in some employment in order to get some money. In this case,
we are serving money, not the person. Thus in the material world we
serve the senses and money. In any case, service is there. We must serve.

Actually the only master is Krsna. Ekale isvara krsna, dra saba bhrtya
(Cc. Adi 5.142). All the demigods, human beings, animals, trees and
everything else are servants. Self-realization is realizing that one is the
eternal servant of Krsna and that one’s duty is to serve Him. Selfrealization is not thinking aham brahmdsmi, “I have become Brahman,
Bhagavan.’ How can we become Bhagavan? If we are Bhagavan, we are
Spiritual Attachment and Material Detachment 121

actually the supreme powerful one. If this is the case, why are we in a
miserable condition? Why are we under the influence of maya? Does
Bhagavan come under the influence of maya? No. Krsna says specifically
in Bhagavad-gitd that prakrti, mdyd, is working under His directions.
Maya is the maidservant of Krsna, and if we are the servants of mdyd,
how can we be Krsna, Bhagavan? When we come to our spiritual senses,
we can understand that we are erroneously engaged in mdyd’s service
and that our duty is to engage in Krsna’s service. That is self-realization.
As stated here: jidna-vairdgya-yuktena. Real understanding is knowing
oneself to be the servant of Krsna, no one else. Because we are under illusion, we are serving kama, lobha, moha, matsarya—lust and greed —
without benefit and without pleasure. Kamddindm kati na katidha palita
durnidesa: *“There is no limit to the unwanted orders of lusty desires.”
(Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 3.2.25) When we come to the understanding
that our pleasure lies in serving Krsna only, we have attained jridnavairdgya. Therefore in Srimad-Bhadgavatam (1.2.7) it is stated:

vasudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogah prayojitah

Janayaty adsu vairdgyam
jfidnam ca yad ahaitukam

‘“By rendering devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and
detachment from the world.” If one engages in the service of Vasudeva,
Krsna, this knowledge comes, and one becomes a mahatma. A mahdatma
is one who realizes that Krsna is everything. He does not defy Krsna or
try to become Krsna. One who does so is not a mahdtmd but a durdtmd, a
rascal. What is the position and knowledge of a mahdtma? Krsna states:

mahdtmanas tu mam pdartha
daivim prakrtim asritah

bhajanty ananya-manaso
jiiatvd bhitddim avyayam

*O son of Prtha, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under
the protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional
122 Teachings of Lord Kapila

service because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
original and inexhaustible.”’ (Bg. 9.13)

A mahdtma cannot be manufactured. He is under the daivi prakrti,
the divine nature. There are two kinds of prakrti—para prakrti and
apara prakrti. Apara prakrti is the material world, and daivi prakrti is
the spiritual world. As soon as one understands that he is uselessly serving maya in the material world in the form of society, friends, country
and so forth, one reaches the stage called jidna, knowledge. As soon as
one attains this knowledge, he reaches the brahma-bhita stage, Brahman realization, and he becomes prasanndtma, happy. One may ask,
‘“Why should I serve Krsna?’’ We have already explained that being a
part means serving the whole. The whole is Krsna, and the individuals
are meant for Krsna’s satisfaction. [sévdsyam idam sarvam.

There are many iSvaras, controllers, but the supreme iSvara is Krsna.
As soon as one attains this realization, he has attained perfect knowledge,
and he renders service in bhakti-yoga. Foolish people say that bhakti is
meant for ajfdnis, unintelligent people, but this is not the case. In
Bhagavad-gitéd Krsna indicates that after many births, the jfidni, the
man in knowledge, surrenders unto Him.

As long as we do not understand Krsna, Vasudeva, we should understand that we are still fools. We may advertise ourselves as very great
Jfidnis, learned personalities, but we are actually fools. That is the sastric
conclusion. If we are actually jfianis, we should surrender unto Krsna.

There are many dharmas, or activities. Some are pious and some impious, but Krsna tells us to give up both. Arjuna was thinking that it was
impious to fight with his relatives, but Krsna was insisting that he fight.
How could Arjuna act impiously? He could not, because Krsna’s service
is transcendental to pious and impious activity. At midnight, when the
gopis heard the sound of Krsna’s flute, they ran to the forest to join Him.
According to the Sdstras, it is immoral for young girls to go see a young
boy in a forest in the dead of night. But this was not an impious activity
because the gopis did this for Krsna. Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who was so
strict that no woman could even come near Him to offer respects, actually
said: ramyd kacid updsand vraja-vadhi-vargena yd kalpita. “What
could be more wonderful than that worship conceived by the gopis?’’ Although it actually appeared immoral for the gopis to dance with Krsna,
Caitanya Mahaprabhu states that their relation with Krsna is the highest
Spiritual Attachment and Material Detachment 123

form of worship. This is actually transcendental knowledge. One becomes transcendental to all pious and impious activities when one serves
Krsna. After all, piety and impiety are within the material modes.
Krsna’s service is transcendental to good and bad, pious and impious.
Bhakti-yoga begins when jfidna and vairdgya are complete. Jfidna is
knowledge, and vairdgya is detachment from matter and engagement of
the mind in spirit. Both of these are automatically attained when we
engage in devotional service to Krsna.

TEXT 19

na yujyamanaya bhaktya
bhagavaty akhilatmani

sadrso ’sti Sivah pantha
yoginam brahma-siddhaye

TRANSLATION

Perfection in self-realization cannot be attained by any kind of
yogi unless he engages in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for that is the only auspicious path.

PURPORT

That knowledge and renunciation are never perfect unless joined by
devotional service is explicitly explained here. Na yujyamdnayd means
“‘without being dovetailed.” When there is devotional service, the question arises where to offer that service. Devotional service is to be offered
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the Supersoul of everything, for that is the only reliable path of self-realization, or Brahman
realization. The word brahma-siddhaye means to understand oneself to
be different from matter, to understand oneself to be Brahman. The
Vedic words are aham brahmdsmi. Brahma-siddhi means that one
should know that he is not matter; he is pure soul. There are different kinds of yogis, but every yogi is supposed to have attained selfrealization, or Brahman realization. It is clearly stated here that unless
one is fully engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, one cannot easily approach the path of brahma-siddhi.
124 Teachings of Lord Kapila

In the beginning of the Second Chapter of Srimad-Bhadgavatam it is
stated that when one engages in the devotional service of Vasudeva,
spiritual knowledge and renunciation of the material world are automatically manifest. Thus a devotee does not have to strive separately for
renunciation or knowledge. Devotional service itself is so powerful that
by one’s service, everything is revealed. It is stated here, Sivah pantha:
this is the only auspicious path for self-realization. The path of devotional service is the most confidential means for attaining Brahman
realization. That perfection in Brahman realization is attained through
the auspicious path of devotional service indicates that the so-called
Brahman realization, or realization of the brahmayjyoti efftulgence, is not
brahma-siddhi. Beyond that brahmajyoti there is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Upanisads a devotee prays to the Lord to
kindly put aside the effulgence, brahmayjyoti, so that the devotee may see
within the brahmajyoti the actual eternal form of the Lord. Unless one
attains realization of the transcendental form of the Lord, there is no
question of bhakti. Bhakti necessitates the existence of the recipient of
devotional service and the devotee who renders devotional service.
Brahma-siddhi through devotional service is realization of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The understanding of the effulgent rays of the
body of the Supreme Godhead is not the perfect stage of brahma-siddhi,
or Brahman realization. Nor is the realization of the Paramatma feature
of the Supreme Person perfect because Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is akhilatmaé—He is the Supersoul. One who realizes the Supreme Personality realizes the other features, namely the
Paramatma feature and the Brahman feature, and that total realization is
brahma-siddhi.

As stated before, the word yoga means “to connect.” Brahmasiddhaye means “‘self-realization,” and aham brahmdsmi means “‘I am
spirit soul.”’ Actually, realizing oneself to be spirit is not sufficient. One
has to progress further. One’s fever may be cured, but one must also
regain his strength and appetite in order to be totally cured. Then one
can have a normal, healthy life, free of disease. Similarly, simply realizing that one is spirit soul is not sufficient. One has to engage in spiritual
activity, and that spiritual activity is bhakti. Mayavadi philosophers
think that it is sufficient to stop all material activity, and the Buddhist
philosophers advocate nirvana, cessation of material life. Neither give
Spiritual Attachment and Material Detachment 125

more information. Actually we are suffering due to this material combination, and that is a fact. This body is composed of earth, water, fire,
air, ether, mind, intelligence and ego. The Buddhists and Mayavadis advocate the annihilation of the components. They say, “*Let the earth go to
earth, let the water go to water, let the fire go to fire and become zero.”’ If
we dismantle the house of the material body and become zero, we attain
nirvana. Nirvana means the cessation of pleasure and pain. The
Mayavadis and Buddhists claim that if we fill an empty pitcher, the water
will make some sound as long as the pitcher is not completely filled.
When the pitcher is filled, there will no longer be any sound. Thus they
claim that all the Vedic mantras and hymns stop when one is completely
Brahman-realized. In other words, the Buddhists and Mayavadis claim
that the material world is false, mithya, and that we should somehow or
other make it zero. However, simply realizing Brahman, realizing one’s
identity as spirit soul, is insufficient. We must realize that Bhagavan is
everywhere:
eko ‘py asau racayitum jagad-anda-kotim
yac-chaktir asti jagad-anda-cayd yad-antah
anddntara-stha-paramdnu-caydntara-stham
govindam ddi-purusam tam aham bhajami

‘I worship the Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who, by one of His
plenary portions, enters the existence of every universe and every atomic
particle and thus unlimitedly manifests His infinite energy all over the
material creation.” (Brahma-samhita 5.35)

Sri Bhagavan is not alone. He is not only localized, but is everywhere.
Although Krsna has a particular place, He is everywhere. It is not that
because Krsna is in one place, He cannot be in others. Since we are conditioned, when we sit in our office we cannot be at home. Krsna is not like
this. Goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhitah. Krsna is always in Goloka
Vrndavana, yet He is anddntara-stha-pardmanu-caydntara-stham. He
is within every atom of this universe. This universe is existing due to the
Garbhodakasayi Visnu. There is not only one universe, but there are
many millions, and they are all working very nicely because the Garbhodakasayi Visnu is present. We.should not think that all these planets are
floating in space without any arrangement having been made. There is
definitely an arrangement.
126 Teachings of Lord Kapila

In order to be completely free of the material modes, one has to come
not only to the platform of jidna and vairdgya, but to bhakti also. When
we mention bhakti, some people say, “I render bhakti to my wife. I love
her very much and take care of her. If I do not see her, | become mad.”’
Thus people have bhakti for their family, country, goddess Durga, other
demigods and so on. However, that kind of bhakti will not do. Therefore
it is said, bhaktir bhagavati. Bhakti must be rendered unto the Supreme.
It is not that one should render bhakti unto an imitation Bhagavan. If one
says that he is Bhagavan, we should ask, “‘Are you present in everyone’s
heart? Can you tell me what I am thinking now?”’ If one is Bhagavan, he
must be akhildtmd. If one is iSvara, he must be present in everyone’s
heart. Krsna is present in everyone’s heart (sarvasya caham hrdi sannivistah). All this should be scrutinizingly studied. It is not that one
should accept this rascal or that rascal as Bhagavan. Nor should one
render bhakti to this demigod or that demigod, to one’s family, country,
society, wife, cat, dog or whatever. All this is not really bhakti but imitation bhakti. It is actually lustful desire. If we can develop bhakti for
Krsna, Krsna consciousness, our lives will be successful. Actually there is
no alternative. As stated in this verse, sddrso ’sti Sivah panthd. Parabrahman is Krsna, and brahma-siddhaye means understanding our relationship with Krsna. It is all right for one to understand oneself as Brahman
(aham brahmdsmi), but what is our relationship with the Parabrahman? There are always two: Brahman and Parabrahman, dtmd and
Paramatma, isvara and Paramesvara, the individual living being and the
supreme living being, nitya and nityGndm, cetanas and cetandnam.
There are always two present, and two means a relationship. We should
therefore understand our relationship with the Supreme, with Parabrahman. Understanding that relationship is brahma-siddhaye.

We are qualitatively one with Parabrahman, but Parabrahman is very
great whereas we are very small. Parabrahman is one (kaivalya). There
is no alternative and no duplicate. There is no one equal to Him or
greater than Him. That is the meaning of kaivalya. Human life is meant
for inquiring about Parabrahman and one’s relationship with Him. Unfortunately, people are not asking questions about Parabrahman. Everyone is asking about the news and the morning paper, and everyone is
concerned with going to the market and purchasing so many goods for
Spiritual Attachment and Material Detachment 127

cheaper prices. All this is going on in human society and in cat and dog
society also.

This world is full of darkness and ignorance, but Krsna consciousness
is transcendental to this material world. In Krsna consciousness, there is
no darkness but simply light. If we try to find things at night, it becomes
very difficult; however, in the daytime, there is no difficulty. The sdstras
enjoin that we leave this darkness and come to light. This light is given
by the guru.

om ajfidna timirdndhasya
caksur unmilitam yena
tasmai Ssri-gurave namah

“I was born in the darkest ignorance, and my spiritual master opened my
eyes with the torch of knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances unto
him.”

It is the guru’s business to give light by knowledge. The guru has completely assimilated the Vedic essence of life. Sruti, knowledge, is received
by hearing. It is not experimental. We cannot understand that which is
beyond our sense perception by experiment. We cannot understand who
our father is by experimental knowledge. One cannot say, “Let me find
out who my father is by experiment.’’ Our father was existing before we
were existing, and it is not possible to understand by experimental
knowledge that this or that man is my father. The real authority is the
mother; therefore Vedic knowledge has been likened to the mother and
the Purdnas to the sisters. We should understand from the Vedas what
ultimate knowledge really is. The ultimate knowable objective is Krsna,
and simply by understanding Krsna, we can understand everything. We
do not have to understand things separately. Krsna is within our hearts.
He is not far away; rather, He is everywhere. If Krsna sees that we are
attached to Him, He becomes our friend. He is a friend to everyone, but
He is especially a friend to His devotees. As Krsna Himself says in
Bhagavad-gita (10.11):

tesim evanukampdrtham
aham ajfidnajam tamah
128 Teachings of Lord Kapila

nasayamy atma-bhava-stho
jiiana-dipena bhasvata

“Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with
the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance.”

Jiidna is there, it is simply covered with the curtain of ignorance.
Light is there, and darkness is there, but when we are in darkness we
cannot see things as they are. Krsna says that as one devotes himself to
rendering service, He Himself dispels the darkness of ignorance. If we
actually want to become perfect in this life, we only need to engage in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavan. It is
not that Bhagavan is difficult to find. Bhagavan is within the heart.
Isvarah sarva bhitanam hrd-deése "rjuna tisthati (Bg. 18.61). That is the
real Bhagavan, within the hearts of all. That Bhagavan is always active.
He instructed Brahma, the lord of the universe, and Brahma, having
received Krsna’s instructions, created the entire universe. Krsna will also
give instructions to us if we simply take to devotional service.

TEXT 20

prasangam ajaram pdsam
dtmanah kavayo viduh

sa eva sddhusu krto
moksa-dvdram apdvrtam

TRANSLATION

Every learned man knows very well that attachment for the material is the greatest entanglement of the spirit soul. But that same
attachment, when applied to self-realized devotees, opens the door
of liberation.

PURPORT

Here it is clearly stated that attachment for one thing is the cause of
bondage in conditioned life, and the same attachment, when applied to
something else, opens the door of liberation. Attachment cannot be
killed; it has simply to be transferred. Attachment for material things is
Spiritual Attachment and Material Detachment 129

called material consciousness, and attachment for Krsna or His devotee is
called Krsna consciousness. Consciousness, therefore, is the platform of
attachment. It is clearly stated here that when we simply purify the consciousness from material consciousness to Krsna consciousness, we attain
liberation. Despite the statement that one should give up attachment,
desirelessness is not possible for a living entity. A living entity, by constitution, has the propensity to be attached to something. We see that if
someone has no object of attachment, if he has no children, he transfers
his attachment to cats and dogs. This indicates that the propensity for attachment cannot be stopped; rather, it must be utilized for the best purpose. Our attachment for material things perpetuates our conditional
state, but the same attachment, when transferred to the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His devotee, is the source of liberation.

Here it is recommended that attachment should be transferred to the
self-realized devotees, the sddhus. And who is a sddhu? A sddhu is not
just an ordinary man with a saffron robe or long beard. A sddhw is described in Bhagavad-gitd as one who unflinchingly engages in devotional
service. Even though one is found not to be following the strict rules and
regulations of devotional service, if one simply has unflinching faith in
Krsna, the Supreme Person, he is understood to be a séddhu. Sddhur eva
sa mantavyah. A sddhu is a strict follower of devotional service. It is
recommended here that if one at all wants to realize Brahman, or spiritual perfection, his attachment should be transferred to the sddhu, or
devotee. Lord Caitanya also confirmed this. Lava-mdatra sddhu-sarige
sarva-siddhi haya: simply by a moment’s association with a sddhu, one
can attain perfection.

Mahatm4 is a synonym of sddhu. It is said that service to a mahatma,
or elevated devotee of the Lord, is dvdram dhur vimukteh, the royal road
of liberation. Mahat-sevam dvdram ahur vimuktes tamo-dvadram yositarh
sarigi-sarngam (Bhdg. 5.5.2). Rendering service to the materialists has
the opposite effect. If anyone offers service to a gross materialist, or a
person engaged only in sense enjoyment, then by association with such a
person the door to hell is opened. The same principle is confirmed here.
Attachment to a devotee is attachment to the service of the Lord because
if one associates with a sddhu, the sddhu will teach one how to become a
devotee, a worshiper and a sincere servitor of the Lord. These are the
gifts of a sddhu. If we want to associate with a sddhu, we cannot expect
130 Teachings of Lord Kapila

him to give us instructions on how to improve our material condition, but
he will instruct us how to cut the knot of the contamination of material
attraction and how to elevate ourselves in devotional service. That is the
result of associating with a sddhu. Kapila Muni first of all instructs that
the path of liberation begins with such association.

According to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu:

‘sddhu-sanga’, ‘sidhu-sanga’——sarva-sastre kaya
lava-matra sddhu-sange sarva-siddhi haya

“The verdict of all revealed scriptures is that by even a moment’s
association with a pure devotee, one can attain all success.” (Cc.
Madhya 22.54)

It is said that man is a social animal, and, according to our association,
we can mold our character. Businessmen associate with one another to
develop their business capabilities. There are many different types of
association, and association brings about bondage to a particular thing. If
one associates with materialistic people, one’s bondage to sense gratification tightens. Woman is the symbol of sense gratification; therefore anything dealing with sense gratification is called yosit-sariga. This material
world is filled with yosit-sariga because everyone is interested in sense

gratification. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (2.44):

bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam
taydpahrta-cetasim

vyavasayatmika buddhih
samdadhau na vidhiyate

“‘In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and material opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolute
determination of devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not take
place.’”” The word bhoga means “sense gratification.” Bhogaisvarya:
Those who are overly attached to opulence and sense gratification cannot
understand spiritual life, and they are very slow to take to it. At the present moment people are manda, very slow. They do not take this Krsna
consciousness movement very seriously because they have been taught
by modern civilization simply to enjoy life for sense gratification. In the
Western countries, especially, there are many implements for sense
Spiritual Attachment and Material Detachment 131

gratification. There are even machines for shaving, although formerly an
ordinary razor would do. Now, thanks to the machine, one does not even
have to move his hand. So this is considered progress. However, we learn
from the Ssdstras that human life is not meant for sense enjoyment but for
tapasya. That is Vedic civilization. First of all, one must be trained in the
brahmacari system and learn how to deny the senses. A brahmacari
should be trained in tapasya, not in enjoyment. Formerly, brahmacaris
would have to go from door to door to beg alms for the dsrama, and they
were trained from the very beginning to address every woman as
mother.

Presently, people are in such a miserable condition that they are saying, “Let us die. Let us die.” However, Krsna in Bhagavad-gita says,
‘““Why should you die?”’ People want to die in order to put an end to the
threefold miseries of material nature, but who is making research on
how to stop death? From Bhagavad-gita we learn that death is not really
natural for us. It is artificially imposed upon us, and we have to become
deathless again. That is the perfection of human life, but no one cares
about it. We have become so dull that we cannot avoid birth, old age, disease and death. We are actually experiencing them because we are not
alert. For this reason, when Sandtana Gosvami approached Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, he said, “My dear Lord, somehow or other You have
dragged me to Your lotus feet. 1 am now asking You what my actual position is. Why am I forced to suffer the threefold miseries of material
life?” No one is interested in inquiring about this matter. Moksa, liberation, means getting free from the threefold miseries of life as well as
birth, old age, disease and death. Sometimes, when people are a little interested, they take to a path that is not even approved, or they invent
something. But nothing need be invented. By this Krsna consciousness
process, everyone can be elevated. Everyone can be delivered, regardless
of his situation or culture. We have spread this Krsna consciousness
movement throughout the world, and people are becoming happy because of it.

According to Bhagavad-gita (9.32), anyone can take shelter of Krsna.
Krsna never denies anyone, and similarly, Krsna’s devotee never denies
anyone. That is this Krsna consciousness movement. We tell everyone,
‘Yes, you are welcome. Take this education and spiritual life and become
a devotee of Krsna.’ Sometimes we are criticized because of this, but
132 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Krsna specifically says in Bhagavad-gita that even those who are
lowborn can take shelter of Him and become elevated for liberation.
What, then, to speak of pious people born in brahminical families? Unfortunately, in this age people born in rich or brahminical families often
don’t care for spiritual realization. They misuse their chance and exhaust
the results of their pious activities. Society needs first-class sddhus in
order to improve. If everyone is a Sidra and debauchee, how can society
be peaceful? Therefore in order to organize society, Krsna recommends
the varndsrama-dharma. There must be ideal bradhmanas, ksatriyas,
vaisyas and Siidras. However, no one cares about this now.

One may ask, “What is a sédhu?”’ A sddhu is one who serves Krsna
and engages in Krsna consciousness without reservation. In Bhagavad
gita (9.30), Sri Krsna says:

api cet sudurdcaro
bhajate mém ananya-bhak
sddhur eva sa mantavyah
samyag vyavasito hi sah

‘‘Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service, he is to be considered saintly because he is properly
situated.”

It is the sddhu’s business to be very tolerant. When one becomes a
devotee, many people become one’s enemy, because in this age people are
asuric, demoniac. Even one’s father may turn into an enemy like
Hiranyakasipu, the father of Prahlada Maharaja. Prahlada was only five
years old and was chanting Hare Krsna, but his father was prepared to
kill him because he was a devotee. Hiranyakasipu was saying, ““Why are
you chanting Hare Krsna? Why are you speaking of a separate God? Iam
God.” That is the meaning of asuric, demoniac. Rascals who claim to be
God themselves are simply demons. Although Prahlada’s father was insisting that he was God, Prahlada Maharaja could not accept this. He
simply accepted his father as an asura, and consequently there was a
quarrel between them. When Hiranyakasipu asked Prahlada Maharaja,
‘What is the best thing you have learned from your teachers?”’’ Prahlada
replied, ““O best of the aswras, as far as I can understand, because we
have accepted this material body, we have to accept death. But this is not
Spiritual Attachment and Material Detachment 133

the object of human life. Human life is meant for moksa, liberation.”
Unfortunately, foolish people do not understand this. Krsna says, mrtyuh
sarva-haras caéham: **] am death, and I will take away everything you
possess.” (Bg. 10.34) Hiranyakagipu was such a powerful demon that
even the demigods were afraid of him, but Krsna took everything away
in a second. Hiranyakasipu was looking for security, and he was thinking, “I will not die in this way, and I will not die in that way.” But he did
not think that he would be killed by the Lord in the form of Nrsimbha.
However intelligent we may be, and however much we may try to cheat
Krsna, Krsna is always more intelligent. When mother Yasoda tried to
bind Krsna with a rope, she found that the rope was always two inches
too short. Our intelligence is like that. We want to cheat God and surpass
Him, but this is not possible. People think themselves very advanced in
knowledge, but actually, due to their pride, their knowledge is taken
away by mayd. Krsna actually takes the knowledge away from atheistic,
demoniac people like Hiranyakasipu. Atheists do not know that Krsna’s
intelligence is always at least two inches greater than anyone else’s.

In material life, we simply struggle for existence. We want to exist,
and we do not want to die. Nor do we want to undergo the pains of birth,
catch diseases or grow old. There are so many miseries in material life
that we do not want, but they are forced upon us. Unfortunately, we are
not intelligent enough to make a solution to all these problems. We
should be inquiring like Sandtana Gosvami about how to put an end to
them all. Instead, we are working in such a way that we have to accept
another material body. We are experiencing the difficulties arising from
this material body, but we are not working in a way to become free. This
Krsna consciousness movement is giving information on how to become
liberated.

Those who are mahatmas are always engaged in chanting Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rima, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare. Bhajana is the chanting of Hare Krsna. If we serve a
mahatma like Haridisa Thakura, who was always engaged in chanting
Hare Krsna, our path of liberation is opened. However, if we associate
with materialistic people, who are simply mad for sense gratification, we
take the way of darkness. Tamo-dvdram yositam sangi-sangam. The
Vedas enjoin that we not remain in darkness but that we go to the light.
We have accepted a body, but we will not be allowed to remain in that
134 Teachings of Lord Kapila

body permanently. We will have to give it up and accept another, and
then another and another. What is this business? The material world is
in such darkness, and people are taking on one body after another. The
Krsna consciousness movement is therefore here to give enlightenment
and liberation, and it is offering not only the simplest process of chanting
Hare Krsna but also the most sublime philosophy.
CHAPTER ELEVEN

The Symptoms of a Sadhu

TEXT 21

titiksavah kaérunikah
suhrdah sarva-dehindm
ajata-satravah sdantah

sddhavah sddhu-bhisanah

TRANSLATION

The symptoms of a saédhu are that he is tolerant, merciful and
friendly to all living entities. He has no enemies, he is peaceful, he
abides by the scriptures, and all his characteristics are sublime.

PURPORT

A sddhu, as described above, is a devotee of the Lord. His concern,
therefore, is to enlighten people in devotional service; that is his mercy.
He knows that without devotional service, human life is spoiled. A devotee travels all over the country, from door to door, preaching, ““Be Krsna
conscious. Be a devotee of Lord Krsna. Don’t spoil your life in simply
fulfilling your animal propensities. Human life is meant for selfrealization, or Krsna consciousness.” These are the preachings of a
sddhu. He is not satished with his own liberation. He always thinks about
others. He is the most compassionate personality toward all fallen souls.
One of his qualifications, therefore, is kdrunika, great mercy to the fallen
souls. While engaged in preaching work, he has to meet with so many opposing elements, and therefore the sadhu has to be very tolerant. Someone may ill-treat him because the conditioned souls are not prepared to
receive the transcendental knowledge of devotional service. They don’t

135
136 Teachings of Lord Kapila

like it; that is their disease. The sddhu has the thankless task of impressing upon them the importance of devotional service. Sometimes devotees
are personally attacked with violence. Lord Jesus Christ was crucified,
Haridésa Thakura was caned in twenty-two marketplaces, and Lord
Caitanya’s principal assistant, Nitydnanda, was violently attacked by
Jagai and Madhai. But still they were tolerant because their mission was
to deliver fallen souls. A sadhu is merciful because he is the well-wisher
of all living entities. He is not only a well-wisher of human society, but a
well-wisher of animal society as well. The word sarva-dehinam refers to
all living entities who have accepted material bodies. Not only does the
human being have a material body, but other living entities as well. The
devotee of the Lord is merciful to everyone—cats, dogs, trees, etc. He
treats all living entities in such a way that they can ultimately get salvation from this material entanglement. Sivananda Sena, one of the disciples of Lord Caitanya, gave liberation to a dog by treating the dog
transcendentally. There are many instances where a dog got salvation by
association with a sddhu, because a sddhu engages in the highest
philanthropic activities for the benediction of all living entities. Yet although a sddhu is not inimical toward anyone, the world is so ungrateful
that even a sddhu has many enemies.

What is the difference between an enemy and a friend? It is a difference in behavior. A sddhu behaves with all conditioned souls for their
ultimate relief from material entanglement. Therefore, no one can be
more friendly than a sddhu in relieving a conditioned soul. A sddhu is
calm, and he quietly and peacefully follows the principles of scripture. A
sddhu is also one who follows the principles of scripture and at the same
time is a devotee of the Lord. One who actually follows the principles of
scripture must be a devotee of God because all the Sdstras instruct us to
obey the orders of the Personality of Godhead. A sddhu, therefore, is a
follower of the scriptural injunctions and a devotee of the Lord. All good
characteristics are prominent in a devotee, and he develops all the good
qualities of the demigods, whereas a nondevotee, even though
academically qualified, has no good qualifications or good characteristics
according to the standard of transcendental realization.

There are 8,400,000 life forms according to the Padma Purana, and
the dtma is the same in all of them. The sddhu can understand this, as

Bhagavad-gita (5.18) indicates:
The Symptoms of a Sadhu 137

vidyd-vinaya-sampanne
bradhmane gavi hastini

Suni caiva svapdke ca
panditah sama-darsinah

“The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a
learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater
[outcaste].”’

It is not that a bréhmana is the same as a dog, but that the brahmana
is a spirit soul, and the dog is also a spirit soul. We are conditioned according to our different bodies, which are given by superior forces.
Yamaraja offers the living entity a body according to his karma. Karmana daiva-netrena. We have already discussed the point that bodies are
awarded according to one’s qualifications. If we acquire the qualities of a
brahmana and work as a bréhmana, we become a bréhmana. If we act as
a dog and do the work of a dog, we become a dog. Nor should one think
that simply because one is born as a brahmana, one is automatically a
brdhmana. There are characteristics mentioned in Bhagavad-gita by
which one can tell to which caste one belongs. Sridhara Svami has also
noted that birth is not everything. One has to acquire the qualities.
Whatever body we may have, our position is temporary. We cannot
remain in any position indefinitely. We may think that at present we are
Americans and are very happy, and that’s all right. We may chalk out
our plans for continued happiness, but nature will not allow us to stay indefinitely. As soon as nature calls, we die and give up our post. Then we
have to take the post of a dog, a cat, a demigod, a human being or whatever. We are now given a most exalted life form, that of a human being,
but if we do not act accordingly, we have to take a lower body. This is
karmana daiva-netrena.

We should therefore be very careful in this human form that our aim
is to become devotees of Lord Krsna. That is the path of liberation. Previously, great personalities in India used to go to the forest in order to
meditate to stop the repetition of birth and death. That is the highest occupation for man, and actually every man is meant for that. Unless we
conquer repeated birth and death, we simply waste our lives like
animals—eating, sleeping, defending and mating. People in this age especially cannot distinguish between animal life and human life. They
138 Teachings of Lord Kapila

think the difference is that animals sleep in the street and human beings
sleep in nice apartments. However, the Sdstras do not define civilization
in this way. Whether one sleeps in the street or in an apartment, the activity is the same. A dog may eat out of a garbage can, and a human being
may eat on a golden plate, but this does not mean that they are engaged
in different activities. In either case, both the dog and the man are taking
food into their bodies. A dog may have sex in the street, and a human
being may have sex in a very nice bed in a secluded place, but that does
not change the activity. People are thinking that advancement of civilization means improving eating, sleeping, mating and defending, but actually these activities have nothing to do with civilization. They simply
tighten our bondage to material life.

Human life is meant for yajfia, sacrifice for the satisfaction of the
Supreme Person. We may perfect our activities, but our success lies in
satisfying Krsna by our talents. Presently we may be attached to material
activity, but we should transfer that attachment to a sddhu. Then our
lives will be successful. Presently we are attached to money, women, nice
houses, country, society, friends, family and so forth. This attachment is
called arjanam pdsu. The word pdsu means “‘rope.’’ When we are bound
with a rope, we are helpless, and now we are bound by the gunas, or the
three modes of material nature. The word guna also means “rope.” We
cannot free ourselves, for we are conditioned. We cannot move freely
without the sanction of the supreme authority. It is generally said that
not a blade of grass moves without God’s sanction. Similarly, we cannot
do anything without the supervision of a superior authority.

It is not that God has to take personal supervision of this. Pardsya saktir vividhaiva sriiyate...na tasya kdryam karanam ca vidyate: in the
Svetasvatara Upanisad (6.8), it is thus stated that the Supreme Lord does
not have to act personally. He has many agents to perform everything for
Him. We are so controlled that we are not even free to blink our eyes. We
may be moving our hands very freely, but at any moment they can be
immediately paralyzed. Presently I am claiming, ““This is my hand.” But
what is this? The hand could be paralyzed immediately. This is conditioned life, and how can we improve it? Our business is to become liberated from all this conditioning. How is this possible? Sa eva sadhusu krto
moksa-dvadram apdurtam (Bhag. 3.25.20). We have to turn our attachment from material things to a sddhu. ‘Sddhu-sarnga’, ‘sddhu-sanga’—
The Symptoms of a Sadhu 139

sarva-sdstre kaya: this is the advice of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. All
Sdstras advise us to associate with a sddhu. Even Canakya Pandita, the
ereat politician, recommended: tyaja durjana-samsargam bhaja sddhusamagamam. One Vaisnava householder asked Caitanya Mahaprabhu
what the duty of a householder is, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu immediately replied, asat-sarga-tydga, —ei vaisnava-dcdara: “*Don’t associate with nondevotees, but search out a sddhu.”’ (Cc. Madhya 22.87)

At the present moment it is very difficult to avoid the company of
asddhus, those who are not sddhus. It is very difficult to find a sadhu for
association. We have therefore started this Krsna consciousness movement to create an association of sddhus so that people may take advantage
and become liberated. There is no other purpose for this society.

Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita (6.47) that the first-class sédhu is one
who is always thinking of Him. This process is not very difficult. We
should always think of Krsna, but how is this possible? We think of our
business, our dog, our family, our lovable object and so many other
things. We have to think of something; without thinking, we cannot
remain. We simply have to divert our thoughts to Krsna. It is the sddhw’s
business to teach this, and one can learn this in the association of a
sddhu. Actually a sdédhu will not teach anything else. Adau Sraddha tatah
sddhu-sangah (Bhakti-rasémrta-sindhu 1.4.15). This is the way to make
spiritual advancement. One has to associate with a sddhu. Often the
sddhu’s task is a thankless one, but he has to be tolerant. Despite all the
trouble a sddhu may encounter, he is very merciful upon fallen conditioned souls. He sees that people are suffering due to a lack of Krsna consciousness, and because he is always thinking of the welfare of others, he
is swhrt. Other people are always envious, but the sddhu is always thinking how to save others from the clutches of maya. A sddhu is kind not
only to human beings but to cats, dogs, trees, plants and insects; he will
hesitate even to kill one mosquito. He does not simply think, °°! shall just
take care of my brother.”’ He looks on all living beings as his brothers because Krsna says that He is the father of all living entities.

Because a sddhu lives in this way, he does not create enemies. If there
are enemies, they become enemies out of their own character, not out of
any provocation on the part of a sddhu. A sddhu simply teaches, “My
dear human being, my dear friend, just surrender to Krsna.’ Enemies
arise due to man’s envious nature. Canakya Pandita says that there are
140 Teachings of Lord Kapila

two envious animals—serpents and men. Although you may be faultless,
either may kill you. Of the two, Canakya Pandita says that the envious
man is more dangerous because a serpent can be subdued by chanting a
mantra or by some herbs, but an envious man cannot be so subdued. In
Kali-yuga, practically everyone is envious, but we have to tolerate this.

Envious people create many impediments to the Krsna consciousness
movement, but we have to tolerate them. There is no alternative. One
must be peaceful and depend on Krsna in all circumstances. These are
the ornaments of a sddhu. We should find a sddhu and associate with
him. Then our path of liberation will be open.

In the next verse, Lord Kapila further explains the activities of a

sddhu.

TEXT 22

mayy ananyena bhavena
bhaktim kurvanti ye drdham

mat-krte tyakta-karmanas
tyakta-svajana-bandhavéh

TRANSLATION

Such a sédhu engages in staunch devotional service to the Lord
without deviation. For the sake of the Lord he renounces all other
connections, such as family relationships and friendly acquaintances within the world.

PURPORT

A person in the renounced order of life, a sannydsi, is also called a
sddhu because he renounces everything—his home, his comfort, his
friends, his relatives and his duties to friends and to family. He
renounces everything for the sake of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A sannyasi is generally in the renounced order of life, but his
renunciation will be successful only when his energy is employed in the
service of the Lord with great austerity. It is said here, therefore, bhaktim kurvanti ye drdhadm. A person who seriously engages in the service
of the Lord and is in the renounced order of life is a sddhu. A sddhu is
The Symptoms of a Sadhu 14]

one who has given up all responsibility to society, family and worldly
humanitarianism, simply for the service of the Lord. As soon as he takes
his birth in the world, a person has many responsibilities and obligations—to the public, demigods, great sages, general living beings,
parents, forefathers and many others. When he gives up all these
obligations for the service of the Supreme Lord, he is not punished for
his renunciation. But if for sense gratification a person renounces these
obligations, he is punished by the law of nature.

Krsna and all the Sdstras say that our only obligation is to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. If we take to His service, we are no longer
obliged to anyone. We are free. How is this possible? By almighty God’s
power. A man may be condemned to death, but if a president or a king
excuses him, he is saved. Krsna’s final instruction in Bhagavad-gitd is to
surrender everything to Him. We can sacrifice our life, wealth and intelligence, and this is called yajfia. Everyone has some intelligence, and
everyone uses his intelligence in one way or another. Generally people
use their intelligence in trying to gratify their senses, but even an ant can
do this. We should try to gratify not our senses but Krsna’s senses. Then
we become perfect.

We have to learn this purificatory process from a sddhu. Inasmuch as
we try to gratify our senses, we become attached to the material world.
We may render service to the sddhu or to Krsna. The sddhu is the representative of Krsna. He will never say, “Serve me,” but will say, “Serve
Krsna.”’ Therefore we have to approach Krsna through the sadhu. This is
confrmed by the Vaisnava dcdrya Narottama dasa Thakura: chddiya
vaisnava-seva nistdra pdyeche keba. We cannot directly approach Krsna;
we have to go through the transparent via media, Krsna’s representative.

Those who are after material concessions go to different demigods.
They take something from Siva, Durga, Kali, Ganeéa, Sirya and
whomever. However, it was the goddess Parvati who asked Lord Siva,
“What is the best type of worship?” Lord Siva advised, dradhananam
sarvesam visnor Grddhanam param (Padma Purana). ‘‘My dear Parvati,
of all kinds of worship, worship of Lord Visnu is the best.’’ Then he
added: tasmdt parataram devi tadiydnadm samarcanam. “And even better than the worship of Lord Visnu is the worship of a Vaisnava, a
devotee.”

Spiritual life begins with the association of a devotee, a sddhu. One
 

 

142 Teachings of Lord Kapila

cannot progress an inch without the mercy of a sddhu. Prahlada
Maharaja has also indicated this:

naisam matis tavad urukramdnghrim
sprsaty anarthapagamo yad-arthah

mahiyasam pdada-rajo-’bhisekam
niskificandnam na vrnita yavat

‘Unless they smear upon their bodies the dust of the lotus feet of a
Vaisnava completely freed from material contamination, persons very
much inclined toward materialistic life cannot be attached to the lotus
feet of the Lord, who is glorified for His uncommon activities. Only by
becoming Krsna conscious and taking shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord
in this way can one be freed from material contamination.”
(Bhag. 7.5.32) Hiranyakagipu asked Prahlada Mahiaraja, ‘My dear son
Prahlada, how have you become so advanced in Krsna consciousness ?’”’
Although Hiranyakasipu was a demon, he was nonetheless inquisitive.
Prahlada Mahfrdaja replied, ““My dear father, O best of the asuras, one
can receive Krsna consciousness only from the instructions of a guru.
One cannot attain it simply by speculating. Ordinary men do not know
that their ultimate destination is to return to Visnu.”’ In the material
world, people are always hoping for something. They hope against hope,
yet their hopes will never be fulfilled. People are trying to become happy
by adjusting the external energy, but they do not know that happiness
cannot be achieved without approaching God. People are thinking, “I
must first of all see to my own interest.” That’s all right, but what is that
interest? That they do not know. People are thinking that by adjusting
the material energy they will be happy, and everyone is trying this individually, collectively or nationally. In any case, it is not possible.
People will ultimately be frustrated. Why attempt a process that will
ultimately meet with frustration? It is therefore said: addnta-gobhir
visatam tamisram punah punas carvita-carvandném (Bhag. 7.5.30).
People are being baffled in so many ways because they cannot control
their senses. Their only possibility of rescue is Krsna. Therefore in this
verse it is said: mayy ananyena bhavena bhaktim kurvanti ye drdham.
Prahlada Maharaja simply thought of Krsna. Because of this, he had to
undergo a great deal of trouble given by his father. Material nature will
not give us freedom very easily. If we become strong enough to try to
The Symptoms of a Sadhu 143

capture the lotus feet of Krsna, mdyd will try to keep us under her
clutches. However, if one gives up everything for Krsna’s sake, maya
can have no effect. The most excellent example of this is the gopis. They
gave up everything—family, prestige and honor —just to follow Krsna.
That is the highest perfection, but that is not possible for ordinary living
entities. We should, however, follow the Gosvamis in their determination
to worship Krsna.

Sandtana Gosvami was an important minister in the government of
Hussain Shah, but he gave up everything to follow Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He adopted the life of a mendicant and lived under a different
tree every night. One may ask, “After giving up material enjoyment,
how can one live?” The Gosvamis lived by dipping into the ocean of the
transcendental loving affairs between Krsna and the gopis. Since that was
their asset, they could live very peacefully. We cannot simply give up
everything. We will become mad if we try to give up everything without
having staunch faith in Krsna. Yet if we find Krsna’s association, we can
easily give up our opulent positions—our family, business and everything. However, that requires sddhu-sariga, association with a sddhu, a
devotee. When we associate with a devotee, the day will eventually come
when we can give up everything and become liberated persons, fit to
return home, back to Godhead.

Presently we are attached to material enjoyment, and Krsna even gives
us a chance to gratify our senses. He lets us enjoy ourselves to the fullest
extent because we have come to this material world to enjoy sense gratification. However, this is called mayé, illusion. It is not really enjoyment,
but simply struggle. When one realizes that he is simply struggling life
after life, that there is actually no real enjoyment in the material world,
one becomes a devotee of Krsna. That realization requires knowledge,
and that knowledge can be acquired by association with a sddhu, a
devotee.

Freedom from this struggle with material existence is further explained by Lord Kapila in the next verse.

TEXT 23

mad-asrayah kathaé mrstah
Srnvanti kathayanti ca
144 Teachings of Lord Kapila

tapanti vividhds tapa
naitan mad-gata-cetasah

TRANSLATION

Engaged constantly in chanting and hearing about Me, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the sédhus do not suffer from
material miseries because they are always filled with thoughts of
My pastimes and activities.

PURPORT

There are multifarious miseries in material existence—those pertaining to the body and the mind, those imposed by other living entities and
those imposed by natural disturbances. But a sddhu is not disturbed by
such miserable conditions because his mind is always filled with Krsna
consciousness, and thus he does not like to talk about anything but the
activities of the Lord. Maharaja Ambarisa did not speak of anything but
the pastimes of the Lord. Vacadmsi vaikuntha-gundnuvarnane. He
engaged his words only in glorification of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Ordinary conditioned souls, being forgetful of the activities of
the Lord, are always full of anxieties and material tribulations. On the
other hand, since the devotees always engage in the topics of the Lord,
they are forgetful of the miseries of material existence. Thus they differ
from other living entities, who are simply suffering.

There is no one in the world materially engaged who can boldly say, “I
am not suffering.” I challenge anyone to say this. Everyone in the material world is suffering in some way or another. If not, why are so many
drugs being advertised? On the television they are always advertising
tranquilizers and pain killers, and in America and in other Western
countries they are so advanced that there are dozens of tablets for various
pains. Therefore there must be some suffering. Actually, anyone who has
a material body has to accept suffering. There are three types of suffering in the material world: ddhydtmika, ddhibhautika and ddhidaivika.
Adhyatmika refers to the body and mind. Today I have a headache or
some pain in my back, or my mind is not very quiet. These are sufferings
called ddhydtmika. There are other forms of suffering called
ddhibhautika, which are sufferings imposed by other living entities.
The Symptoms of a Sadhu 145

Apart from this, there are sufferings called adhidaivika, over which we
have no control whatsoever. These are caused by the demigods or acts of
nature, and include famine, pestilence, flood, excessive heat or excessive
cold, earthquakes, fire and so on. Nonetheless, we are thinking that we
are very happy within this material world, although in addition to these
threefold miseries there is also birth, old age, disease and death. So
where is our happiness? Because we are under the spell of mdyd, we are
thinking that our position is very secure. We are thinking, “Let us enjoy
life,” but what kind of enjoyment is this?

Obviously we have to tolerate suffering. One of the characteristics of a
sddhu is tolerance. Everyone is tolerant to a degree, but a sddhw’s
tolerance and an ordinary man’s tolerance are different. This is because a
sddhu knows that he is not the body. According to a Bengali Vaisnava
song: deha-smrti nahi ydra samsdra-bandhana kahah tara.

If we properly understand that we are not the body, although we may
suffer, we will not feel the suffering as acutely. For instance, if one
thinks, “This is my car,”’ and is very attached to it, he suffers more when
it is wrecked than a person who thinks, “‘It can be repaired, or I can leave
it.”” It is a question of mental absorption. Because he is more like an
animal, a materialist suffers more. The devotee, on the other hand, takes

Krgna’s advice in Bhagavad-gita (2.14):

matrd-sparsas tu kaunteya
Sitosna-sukha-duhkha-déh
dgamapayino ‘nityds
tams titiksasva bharata

‘‘O son of Kunti, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress
and their disappearance in due course are like the appearance and disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without
being disturbed.”’

In summer we suffer, and in winter we suffer. In the summer, fire
brings suffering, and in the winter the same fire is pleasing. Similarly, in
the winter, water is suffering, but in the summer it is pleasing. The
water and the fire are the same, but sometimes they are pleasing, sometimes they are not. This is due to the touch of the skin. We all have some
 

146 Teachings of Lord Kapila

‘‘skin disease,” which is the body, and therefore we are suffering. Because we have become such rascals, we are thinking, “I am this body.”
According to the Ayur-vedic system, the body is composed of three material elements: kapha-pitta-vdyu. The more we are in the bodily conception, the more we suffer.

Presently so many “‘ism’s’’ are being developed according to the bodily
conception — nationalism, communism, socialism, communalism and so
on. In Calcutta during the 1947 Hindu-Muslim riots, there was more
suffering because everyone was thinking, “I am a Hindu” or “I am a
Muslim.” But, if one is advanced in Krsna consciousness, he will not
fight according to such conceptions. A Krsna conscious person knows that
he is neither Hindu nor Muslim but the eternal servant of Krsna. Because people are being educated to become more body conscious, their
sufferings are increasing. If we reduce the bodily conception, suffering
will also be reduced. Those who are Krsna conscious, who are always
thinking of Krsna within their minds and within their hearts, are not
suffering as much because they know that whatever they might suffer is
due to Krsna’s desire. Therefore they welcome suffering. For instance,
when Krsna was leaving, Queen Kunti said, ““My dear Krsna, when we
were in a dangerous situation, You were always present as our friend and
adviser. Now we are well situated with our kingdom, and now You are
leaving for Dvaraka. This is not good. It is better that we again suffer so
that we can always remember You.’’ Thus the devotee sometimes
welcomes suffering as an opportunity to remember Krsna constantly.
When a devotee suffers, he thinks, “This is due to my past misdeeds. Actually I should be suffering a great deal, but due to Krsna’s grace I am
suffering just a little. After all, suffering and enjoyment are in the
mind.” In this way, a devotee is not greatly affected by suffering, and
this is the difference between a devotee and a nondevotee.

Prahlada Maharaja, a five-year-old boy, had to undergo a great deal of
suffering at the hands of his father, who was torturing him for being a
devotee. The boy was trampled by elephants, thrown from a mountain,
placed in burning oil and thrown into a snake pit, yet he was silent during this whole ordeal. Similarly, Haridiésa Thakura, a Muhammadan by
birth, was a very great devotee and was always chanting Hare Krsna.
That was his only fault. However, the Muslim Kazi called him forth and
said, ““You are a Muhammadan, born in a great Muhammadan family, yet
The Symptoms of a Sadhu 147

you are chanting this Hindu Hare Krsna mantra. What is this?”
Haridasa Thakura mildly replied, ‘My dear sir, there are many Hindus
who have become Muhammadans. Suppose I have become a Hindu?
What is wrong with this?”’ The Kazi became very angry and ordered
Haridésa Thakura to be whipped in twenty-two bazaars. This essentially
meant that he was to be beaten to death, but because he was such a great
devotee he did not actually feel the pain. Although a devotee may sometimes have to suffer, he tolerates the suffering. At the same time, he is
very kind to conditioned souls and tries to elevate them to Krsna consciousness. This is one of the primary features of a devotee’s life. People
are always putting a sddhu into difficulties, but he does not give up his
job, which is to spread Krsna consciousness so that others may become
happy. It was Prahlada Maharaja who said: ““My Lord, I am not suffering, for | know the art of being happy.” How is this? “Simply by hearing
about You and chanting about You I am happy.” This is the business of a
devotee—hearing and chanting about the Lord. This is Ssravanam
kirtanam visnoh smaranam. Now this sravanam kirtanam is taking place
all over the world through the Krsna consciousness movement.

Even in ordinary life it is possible for the mind to be absorbed in such
a way that even a surgical operation may not disturb a man. Years ago,
when Stalin had to undergo a surgical operation, he refused the use of
chloroform. If this is possible even in an ordinary materialistic life, what
to speak of spiritual life? One’s mind should always be absorbed in
Krsna consciousness, in thinking of Krsna. It is Krsna’s injunction,
‘Always think of Me.”’ The European and American youths in the Krsna
consciousness movement have been accustomed to many bad habits since
birth, but now they have given these up. Many people think that it is impossible to live without illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling. One famous Marquess told one of my Godbrothers, “‘Please make
me a bradhmana.”’ My Godbrother said, “‘Yes, it is not a very difficult
thing. Simply give up these bad habits—intoxication, illicit sex, meateating and gambling. Then you can become a bradhmana.”’ The Marquess
then said, “Impossible! This is our life.”’ Actually we have seen that in
Western countries older men cannot give up these habits, and because of
this they are suffering, yet many young boys and girls have given them
up, and there is no suffering. This is due to Krsna consciousness.

This process is open to everyone. Everyone has heard of the
148 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Bhagavad-gitd. We can attain perfection simply by following the instructions given in this book. It is not necessary to abandon our responsibilities. Maharaja Ambarisa was a great emperor administering to his
kingdom, yet at the same time he spoke only of Krsna. Caitanya Mahaprabhu requested that His devotees only talk about Krsna. If we simply
talk about Krsna and hear about Him, the stage will come when we will
no longer suffer. This is called Gnandamayo ’bhydsat in the Vedantasiitra. The living entity and Krsna are both dnandamaya, transcendentally blissful. On that platform, there is no possibility of material suffering. It is not a question of displaying some magical feats. The greatest
magic is freedom from suffering, and this is the freedom of a devotee.
When we feel pleasure from hearing about Krsna and talking about Him,
we should know that we are making progress on the path of perfection.
At that time, material suffering will not be felt at all. This is the practical
effect of rendering devotional service, which Lord Kapila is pointing out
to His mother.

TEXT 24

ta ete sddhavah sddhvi
sarva-sarnga-vivaryitah

sangas tesv atha te prarthyah
sariga-dosa-hara hi te

TRANSLATION

O My mother, O virtuous lady, these are the qualities of great
devotees who are free from all attachment. You must seek attachment to such holy men, for this counteracts the pernicious effects
of material attachment.

PURPORT

Kapila Muni herein advises His mother, Devahiti, that if she wants to
be free from material attachment, she should increase her attachment for
the sddhus, or devotees who are completely freed from all material
attachment. In Bhagavad-gitd (15.5) it is stated, nirmana-mohd jitasariga-dosah. This refers to one who is completely freed from the puffedThe Symptoms of a Sadhu 149

up condition of material possessiveness. A person may be materially very
rich or respectable, but if he at all wants to transfer himself to the spiritual kingdom, back home, back to Godhead, he has to be freed from material possessiveness because that is a false position.

The word moha used here means the false understanding that one is
rich or poor. In this material world, the conception that one is very rich
or very poor —or any such consciousness in connection with material existence—is false, because this body itself is temporary. A pure soul who
is prepared to be freed from this material entanglement must first be
free from the association of the three modes of nature. Our consciousness
at the present moment is polluted because of association with the three
modes of nature; therefore in Bhagavad-gitd the same principle is
stated. It is advised, jita-sariga-dosah: one should be freed from the contaminated association of the three modes. Here also, in the SrimadBhagavatam, this is confirmed: a pure devotee, who is preparing to
transfer himself to the spiritual kingdom, is also freed from the association of the three modes. We have to seek the association of such devotees.
For this reason we have begun the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. There are many mercantile and scientific associations in
human society established to develop a particular type of education or
consciousness, but there is no association which helps one to get free
from all material association. If anyone wishes to become free from this
material contamination, he has to seek the association of devotees,
wherein Krsna consciousness is exclusively cultured.

Because a devotee is freed from all contaminated material association,
he is not affected by the miseries of material existence, even though he
appears to be in the material world. How is it possible? A cat carries her
kittens in her mouth, and when she kills a rat, she also carries the booty
in her mouth. Thus both are carried in the mouth of the cat, but they are
in different conditions. The kitten feels comfort in the mouth of the
mother, whereas when the rat is carried in the mouth of the cat, the rat
feels the blows of death. Similarly, those who are sadhus, or devotees
engaged in the transcendental service of the Lord, do not feel the contamination of material miseries, whereas those who are not devotees in
Krsna consciousness actually feel the miseries of material existence. One
should therefore give up the association of materialistic persons and
seek the association of those engaged in Krsna consciousness. By such
150 Teachings of Lord Kapila

association one will be benefited by spiritual advancement. By their
words and instructions, one will be able to cut off his attachment to material existence.

In this Kali-yuga, the present age, the dangerous modes of rajo-guna
and tamo-guna, passion and ignorance, are especially prominent. Practically everyone in this age is contaminated by lusty desire, greed and ignorance. It is said in the Sdstras that in this age of Kali, sattva-guna, the
mode of goodness, is practically nonexistent.

The Fourteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gitd nicely explains how one
can free oneself of contamination by the material modes. Now
Kapiladeva advises, “Mother, if you want to get rid of the contamination
of material nature, you should associate with a sddhu.’’ Attachment to
the material modes brings about our bondage. If we want to be free from
this bondage, we have to transfer our attachment to a sddhu.

Actually everyone is attached to something. No one can say that he is
free from attachment. The Mayavada and Buddhist philosophies tell us to
become detached, but this in itself is not possible. A child is attached to
playing in so many ways, but gradually his attachments should be
transferred to reading and going to school to acquire an education. It is a
question not of stopping attachment but of transferring it. If one simply
tries to put an end to attachment, he will become mad. Something must
be given in the place of attachment. For instance, we tell our disciples to
stop eating meat, but how is this meat-eating stopped? In the place of
meat, we are supplying kacauris, rasagullad and many other palatable
things. In this way, detachment is possible. First of all, nullify the inferior attachment, and then supply a better attachment. There is no
question of forcing a living entity. This must be done gradually. A child
may have some attachment, but by the system of replacing attachment,
his attachment is overturned. Similarly, our consciousness has somehow
or other become contaminated. Now it has to be purified. Then Krsna
consciousness will automatically arise and awaken.

Krsna consciousness is our original consciousness, but somehow or
other it has become covered by material attachment. The question is how
to give up material attachment and become attached to Krsna. The process is sddhu-sariga, association with a sddhu. We have many attachments in this material world, but we cannot make these attachments
void. We simply have to purify them. Some say that if the eye is diseased,
The Symptoms of a Sadhu 151

it should be plucked out, but that is not treatment. Treatment is removing the disease. Somehow or other there is a cataract, and if the cataract
is removed, one’s eyesight will be revived. We have many desires, but we
have to divert these desires to Krsna’s service. For instance, we may be
very attached to making money; therefore Krsna says, ““Yes, go ahead
and conduct your business. There is no harm. Simply give Me the
results.” As stated in Bhagavad-gita (9.27):

yat karosi yad asnasi
yay Juhosi dadasi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kurusva mad-arpanam

““O son of Kunti, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and
give away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done
as an offering unto Me.”

This is the beginning of bhakti-yoga. If we conduct business and earn
money, we should spend it for Krsna. This is a form of bhakti. Another
_ vivid example is Arjuna, who was a fighter. By fighting, he became a
devotee. He did not become a devotee by chanting Hare Krsna but by
fighting in the Battle of Kuruksetra. Krsna advised him to fight, but because Arjuna was a Vaisnava, in the beginning he was unwilling. A
Vaisnava does not like to kill anything, but if Krsna orders him, he must
fight. He does not fight out of his own will, because a Vaisnava’s natural
instinct is not to do harm to anyone. However, when a Vaisnava knows
that Krsna wants a particular thing done, he does not care for his own
considerations. In any case, everyone has some particular type of duty,
an occupation. If we perform our occupation in the worship of Krsna, our
life will be perfect. This is also the instruction given in Srimad
Bhagavatam (1.2.13):

atah pumbhir dvija-srestha
varnasrama-vibhagasah

svanusthitasya dharmasya
samsiddhir hari-tosanam
152 Teachings of Lord Kapila

‘‘O best of the twice-born, it is therefore concluded that the highest perfection one can achieve by discharging the duties prescribed for one’s
own occupation according to caste divisions and orders of life is to please
the Personality of Godhead.”

Formerly, the varndsrama-dharma was prominent, and everyone had
a particular duty according to his position in society. Now the occupational duties have expanded, but it doesn’t matter whether one is an
engineer, a doctor or whatever. Simply try to serve Krsna by the results
of work. That is bhakti. It is not the philosophy of this Krsna consciousness movement to disengage people from their activities. One should
engage in his occupation, but one should never forget Krsna. Krsna advises us to always become Krsna conscious, and we should always think
that we are acting for Krsna. Of course, we should work by the order of
Krsna or His representative, not whimsically. If we perform some nonsensical action and think, “I am doing this for Krsna,” that will not be
accepted. The work must be verified by Krsna’s acceptance or by the acceptance of Krsna’s representative. Arjuna did not fight without Krsna’s
order; therefore we must receive our orders also. We may say, “I cannot
find Krsna. How can I follow His order?”’ It is the role of the sddhu to
impart Krsna’s orders. Since Krsna’s representative is the sddhu,
Kapiladeva advises His mother to associate with sddhus.

We have described the symptoms of a sddhu, and we have stated that a
sddhu should be accepted by his characteristics. It is not that we accept
anyone who comes along and says, “I am a sddhu.’’ The characteristics of
a sddhu have to be present. Similarly, it is not that anyone is accepted
who comes along and says, “I am an incarnation of God.”’ There are
characteristics of God given in the sdstras. Sddhu-sariga, association with
a sddhu, is very essential in Krsna consciousness. People are suffering
due to contamination by tamo-guna and rajo-guna. The sddhw teaches
one how to remain purely in sattva-guna by truthfulness, cleanliness,
mind control, sense control, simplicity, tolerance, and full faith and
knowledge. These are some of the characteristics of sattva-guna.

Instead of thinking, “‘Unless I have a drink, I will go mad,” one
should think, “‘Unless I associate with a sddhu, I will go mad.” When we
can think in this way, we will become liberated. Caitanya Mahaprabhu
has stated that He wants every village in the entire world to be a center
for Krsna consciousness so that people can take advantage of sddhus and
The Symptoms of a Sadhu 153

in turn become sddhus. This is the mission of this Krsna consciousness
movement. We simply have to voluntarily undergo some penance in the
beginning. It may be a little painful in the beginning to refrain from illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling, but one has to be
tolerant. To be cured of a disease, we may have to agree to undergo some
surgical operation. Although the operation may be very painful, we have
to tolerate it. This is called titiksavah. At the same time, we have to be
kdrunikéh—that is, we have to take compassion upon fallen souls by
going from town to town to enlighten others in Krsna consciousness. This
is a sddhw’s duty. Those who are preachers are superior to those who go
to the Himalayas to meditate. It is good to go to the Himalayas to meditate
for one’s personal benefit, but those who undergo many difficulties in
order to preach are superior. They are actually fighting for Krsna’s sake,
and they are certainly more compassionate. Those sddhus who leave
Vrndavana to go fight in the world, to spread Krsna consciousness, are
superior sddhus. This is the opinion of Krsna in Bhagavad-gita
(18.68-69):

ya idam paramam guhyam
mad-bhaktesv abhidhasyati

bhaktim mayi param krtva
mam evaisyaty asamsayah

na ca tasman manusyesu
kascin me priya-krttamah

bhavité na ca me tasmdd
anyah priyataro bhuvi

‘For one who explains the supreme secret to the devotees, devotional
service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me. There is no
servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will there ever be one
more dear.”

If we want to be quickly recognized by Krsna, we should become
preachers. This is also the message of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. It is not
that one should remain in India; rather, one should travel all over the
world to preach Krsna consciousness. The sddhu is suhrt; he is the wellwisher of everyone. This does not mean that he is a well-wisher for an
154 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Indian nationalist or whatever. No, he is a well-wisher even of cats and
dogs. A devotee even wishes to benefit cats and dogs by giving them
prasdda. Once, when devotees from Bengal were going to see Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, a dog began to follow them, and the leader of the party,
Sivdnanda Sena, was giving prasdda to the dog. When they had to cross a
river, the boatman would not take the dog, but Sivananda Sena paid him
more money and said, **Please take this dog. He is a Vaisnava, for he has
joined our company. How can we leave him behind?’’ Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself actually threw some of His food to the dog, and in this
way the dog attained Vaikuntha.

Not only is a sddhu everyone’s well-wisher, but he is not an enemy of
anyone. He is also sdnta, peaceful. These are the preliminary characteristics of a sddhu. He is also attached to no one but Krsna. Mayy
ananyena bhavena. These are the external and internal symptoms of a
devotee. A devotee also respects the demigods because he knows their
position in relation to Krsna. In Brahma-samhita (5.44), the goddess
Durga is worshiped as the external energy, or potency, of Krsna.

srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka
chayeva yasya bhuvanani bibharti durga

icchdnuriipam api yasya ca cestate sd
govindam ddi-purusam tam aham bhajami

“The external potency, mdyd, who is of the nature of the shadow of the
cit, spiritual, potency, is worshiped by all people as Durga, the creating,
preserving and destroying agency of this mundane world. I adore the
primeval Lord Govinda, in accordance with whose will Durga conducts
herself.”

The goddess Durga is so powerful that she can create, maintain and
annihilate. However, she cannot act independent of Krsna. She is like a
shadow of Krsna. A sddhu knows that prakrti, nature, is working under
Krsna’s direction. Similarly, a policeman knows that he is not working
independently but under government orders. This knowledge is required
in order that the policeman, who has some power, will not think that he
has become God. No, God is not so cheap. God has multienergies, and one
of these energies is Durga. It is not that she is all and all, for there are
many millions of Durgas, just as there are many millions of Sivas and
The Symptoms of a Sadhu 155

millions of universes. Although there are millions of demigods, God is
one. It is not that there are a million Gods. Of course, God can expand in
millions of forms, but that is different. A devotee offers respects to the
demigods as the assistants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, not as
the supreme power. One who does not know God as He is considers the
demigods to be supreme. Such people are less intelligent. A devotee
offers respects to the demigods, but he knows that the Supreme Lord is
Krsna. Krsnas tu bhagavan svayam. Actually a sddhu, a Vaisnava, offers
respects to everyone, and he is ready to give up relatives and everything
else for Krsna’s sake. A sddhu simply takes pleasure in hearing about
Krsna and talking about Him.

There are many pastimes enacted by Krsna. He fights and kills
demons, and He performs His pastimes with the gopis. He plays as a
cowherd boy in Vrndavana and as King of Dvaraka. There are many
books about Krsna, krsna-kathd, and this Krsna consciousness movement has already published many of them. Apart from Bhagavad-gita,
which is spoken by Krsna, we can read these other books. In this way,
one can learn the art of becoming a sddhu. Simply by hearing about
Krsna and speaking about Him, we will be immediately relieved from the
suffering of this material condition.

As stated in this verse:

ta ete sddhavah sddhvi
sarva-sariga-vivarjitah

These symptoms are visible when one no longer has material attachment.
A sddhu does not think himself Hindu, Muslim, Christian, American, Indian or whatever. A sddhu simply thinks, “I am the servant of Krsna.”
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has said, “I am not a brahmana, ksatriya,
vaisya, Sidra, brahmacari or whatever. I am simply the servant of the
servant of the servant of Krsna.’’ One need only learn this process in
order to render the best service to humanity.
CHAPTER TWELVE

Association With the Supreme Lord
Through Hearing

TEXTS 25-26

satam prasangdn mama virya-samvido
bhavanti hrt-karna-rasdyanah kathah
taj-josandd Gsv apavarga-vartmani
sraddha ratir bhaktir anukramisyati
bhaktya pumah jata-virdga aindriydd
drsta-srutan mad-racandnucintayd
cittasya yatto grahane yoga-yukto
yatisyate rjubhir yoga-margaih

TRANSLATION

In the association of pure devotees, discussion of the pastimes
and activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is very pleasing and satisfying to the ear and the heart. By cultivating such
knowledge one gradually becomes advanced on the path of liberation, and thereafter he is freed, and his attraction becomes fixed.
Then real devotion and devotional service begin.

Thus consciously engaged in devotional service in the association of devotees, a person gains distaste for sense gratification,
both in this world and in the next, by constantly thinking about
the activities of the Lord. This process of Krsna consciousness is
the easiest process of mystic power; when one is actually situated
on that path of devotional service, he is able to control the mind.

PURPORT

The process of advancing in Krsna consciousness and devotional
service is described here. The first point is that one must seek the

157
158 Teachings of Lord Kapila

association of persons who are Krsna conscious and who engage in devotional service. Without such association one cannot advance. Simply by
theoretical knowledge or study one cannot make any appreciable advancement. One must give up the association of materialistic persons and
seek the association of devotees because without such association one
cannot understand the activities of the Lord. Generally, people are convinced of the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth. Because they do
not associate with devotees, they cannot understand that the Absolute
Truth can be a person and have personal activities. This is a very difficult
subject matter, and unless one has personal understanding of the Absolute Truth, there is no meaning to devotion. Service or devotion cannot
be offered to anything impersonal. Service must be offered to a person.
Nondevotees cannot appreciate Krsna consciousness by reading the
Srimad-Bhagavatam or any other Vedic literature wherein the activities
of the Lord are described; they think that these activities are fictional,
because spiritual life is not explained to them in the proper mood. To
understand the personal activities of the Lord, one has to seek the
association of devotees, and by such association, when one contemplates
and tries to understand the transcendental activities of the Lord, the path
to liberation is open, and he is freed. One who has firm faith in the
Supreme Personality of Godhead becomes fixed, and his attraction for
association with the Lord and the devotees increases. Association with
devotees means association with the Lord. The devotee who makes this
association develops the consciousness for rendering service to the Lord,
and then, being situated in the transcendental position of devotional service, he gradually becomes perfect.

In all scriptures people are encouraged to act in a pious way so that
they can enjoy sense gratification not only in this life but also in the next.
For example, one is promised promotion to the heavenly kingdom of
higher planets by pious fruitive activities. But a devotee in the association of devotees prefers to contemplate the activities of the Lord—how
He has created this universe, how He is maintaining it, how the creation
dissolves, and how in the spiritual kingdom the Lord’s pastimes are
enacted. There are full literatures describing these activities, especially
Bhagavad-gita, Brahma-samhita and Srimad-Bhagavatam. The sincere
devotee who associates with devotees gets the opportunity to hear and
contemplate these subjects, and the result is that he feels distaste for soAssociation With the Supreme Lord Through Hearing 159

called happiness in this or that world, in heaven or on other planets. The
devotees are simply interested in being transferred to the personal
association of the Lord; they are no longer attracted to temporary socalled happiness. That is the position of one who is yoga-yukta. One who
is fixed in mystic power is not disturbed by the allurement of this world
or that world; he is interested in spiritual understanding. This is very
easily attained by the easiest process, bhakti-yoga. Rjubhir yogamargaih. A very suitable word used here is rjubhih, or “very easy.”’
There are different processes of yoga-marga, attaining yoga perfection,
but this process, devotional service to the Lord, is the easiest. Not only is
it the easiest process, but the result is sublime. Everyone, therefore,
should try this process of Krsna consciousness and reach the highest
perfection.

Sat means “‘existence,’’ and asat means “‘that which does not exist,”’
that which is temporary. The material world is asat; therefore the Vedas
enjoin: asato ma sad gama: “Do not remain within this material world.”’
Those who are interested in materialistic life are also called asat.
When asked how a Vaisnava behaves, Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied,
asat-sanga-tyaga,——ei vaisnava-dcara: “A devotee first of all avoids
the company of asat, those who are materially interested.” (Cc.
Madhya 22.87) We have established this Krsna consciousness movement
in order to avoid asat-sariga, association with those who are interested in
material things. Because we are associating with Krsna, we do not wish to
talk about anything but Krsna. Everyone is interested in this business or
that, and we are exclusively interested in our Krsna consciousness business. Those who are asat are very much attached to sense gratification,
and the culmination of sense gratification 1 is sex.

In addition, Sri Sanatana Gosvami in his Hari-bhakti-vilasa recommends that one should not hear Bhagavad-gitd, the Purdnas, the
Srimad-Bhaégavatam or any hari-katha from anyone who is not a
Vaisnava in his actions. That means that we should not hear these Vedic
literatures from the Mayavadis, who actually do not accept Krsna as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. How can one not accept Krsna as the
Supreme Lord and yet dare to speak on Bhagavad-gita? We will never
derive any benefit from listening to the commentaries of such people.
Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam should be heard from the devotees. We can hear Bhagavad-gitd from Mayavadis for hundreds of years
160 Teachings of Lord Kapila

and yet never understand Krsna. It is therefore forbidden for Vaisnavas
to hear talks given by Mayavadis.

Hari-katha, talks about Sri Hari, or Krsna, are amrta, nectar. If one
hears them from the right source, he attains amrta (so ’mrtatvdya kalpate). Mrta means “birth and death,” and amrta means “‘the cessation of
birth and death.” Spiritual life means putting an end to birth, old age,
disease and death. Getting amrta, nectar, means getting relief from birth
and death, and that is the real aim of spiritual life. Lord Krsna says in
Bhagavad-gita (7.16) that spiritual life begins when one is pious:

catur-vidha bhajante mam
janah sukrtino ’rjuna

arto jiyjidsur artharthi
jridni ca bharatarsabha

“O best among the Bharatas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render
devotional service unto Me—the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute.”

If we actually want to become pious and develop our devotional life,
we have to associate unflinchingly with a sddhu. Then we can acquire
some taste for Krsna. When we discuss Krsna with a sddhu, the discussion becomes very pleasing, and we develop some taste, which is called
rasa, or mellow. Rasa is the enjoyment we derive from drinking something very nice when we are thirsty. Krsna has instructed us to think of
Him when drinking water. This is not very difficult. Krsna also tells us to
think of Him when we see sunlight in the morning. Why do we say, “Can
you show me God?” God is showing us Himself. Why do we close our
eyes to try to see Him? He says, “I am this, and I am that.” It is not that
suddenly we can expect to see God, but we can become qualified to see
God through the association of a sddhu. Presently many people are
interested in receiving degrees from big universities, but education without God consciousness is simply an expansion of mdyda’s influence. Because knowledge is taken away by illusion, the universities are simply
presenting impediments on the path of God consciousness. The living entity is already illusioned when he comes into the material world, and socalled advanced education simply increases his illusion. Trying to become
Association With the Supreme Lord Through Hearing 161

happy in this temporary, material life, the living entity has forgotten that
he is the eternal servant of Krsna. Even if one becomes happy in this
temporary life, his happiness is an illusion because no one is allowed to
stay and enjoy his happiness. These points have to be understood in the
association of devotees. A devotee knows everything because he has seen
the Supreme Absolute Truth, Krsna.

What is the goal of veddnta-darsana? Veda means “‘knowledge,’’ and
anta means “‘ultimate.’’ What is that ultimate knowledge? In Bhagavadgita (15.15) Sri Krsna says:

vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
vedanta-krd veda-vid eva caham

“By all the Vedas, I am to be known; indeed, I am the compiler of
Vedanta, and I am the knower of the Vedas.”’

If we listen to Krsna and understand what and who He is, we can actually understand Vedanta. If we do not understand Krsna but advertise
ourselves as Vedantists, we are just being illusioned. Without understanding Krsna, one is actually a midha, a fool. People do not know it,
but actually anyone in the material world is more or less a midha. We
are all midhas, for unless we are miidhas, we do not come into the material world. From Brahma down to the smallest ant, we are all miadhas
of different degrees. In order to become really learned, we have to associate with devotees. Then we can actually relish krsna-katha. When discussed among devotees, krsna-kathd is pleasing to the heart and ear. This
requires a little training, and this training is given by the devotees. We
should follow the devotees in their practical daily life, in their routine
work and behavior. Cultivation means practice, and the great dcdryas
have given a routine we can cultivate. For instance, The Nectar of Devotion by Srila Ripa Gosvami deals with the cultivation of devotional service, and this book, which we have translated, has been very well
received in European and American universities. Bhakti-rasdmrtasindhu, The Nectar of Devotion, is the actual science of bhakti. Bhakti is
not sentiment; it is a great science, and we have to learn it scientifically.
It is not that we have to wait for another life to cultivate devotional service. We can read The Nectar of Devotion, live with devotees, rise early
162 Teachings of Lord Kapila

in the morning to attend marigala-darati, study Vedic literature, take
prasdda and preach Krsna consciousness.

Maya is very strong, and to begin devotional service is to declare war
against m@yd. Some of the devotees in this Krsna consciousness movement may fall down, but whatever is done sincerely is to their permanent
credit. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita. If one renders a little devotional service, he does not fall down into the lower species but again attains a human form. There are 8,400,000 species, but the fallen devotee
is guaranteed a human life. If one becomes Krsna conscious, he is
assured of a good birth in the next life. However, if one completes his
Krsna consciousness in this life, he will not take birth again but will go to
Krsna. This is what is actually wanted. Why take the chance of being
born into a rich family or a brahmana family? Actually, such a birth is
quite risky because there is really no guarantee. Generally, those who are
rich don’t care at all for Krsna consciousness, and those who are born in
brahmana families generally become puffed-up, thinking, “I am a
brahmana. | am born in a very high family.” Thinking this brings about
their falldown. It is said that pride precedes a fall. A Vaisnava is by
nature very humble.

These are the chances one takes when one becomes a human being.
Krsna is personally advising us to take up the opportunities offered by
the Krsna consciousness movement. We should take them and not run
the risk of committing spiritual suicide.

This is the process for understanding the Absolute Truth, the
Supreme Person, the Supreme Being. In the Absolute, there are no contradictions. Krsna’s name, form, activities, paraphernalia and attributes
are identical with Krsna. This is the meaning of absolute. There is no difference between Krsna’s form and Krsna. Krsna’s hands and Krsna’s
legs are nondifferent. In the material world, there is a difference between our left hand and our right hand, between the nose and the ear,
but these dualities do not exist in Krsna. This is the meaning of absolute.
As stated in Brahma-samhita (5.32):

arigani yasya sakalendriya-vrttimanti
pasyanti panti kalayanti ciram jaganti

dnanda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya
govindam ddi-purusam tam aham bhajdémi
Association With the Supreme Lord Through Hearing 163

“I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, whose transcendental form is
full of bliss, truth and substantiality, and is thus full of the most dazzling
splendor. Each of the limbs of that transcendental figure possesses, in
Himself, the full-fledged functions of all the organs, and eternally sees,
maintains and manifests the infinite universes, both spiritual and mundane.” The different parts of our bodies serve different purposes, but
any limb of Krsna’s body can serve any purpose. Krsna can eat through
His eyes, or Krsna can go somewhere simply by thinking. The Absolute
is advaita. There is no duality in the Absolute. Everything is one.

Our material disease lies in wanting to satisfy our senses. We have
stated before that advancement of civilization means advancement of
sense gratification, but bhakti means just the opposite. As long as we are
interested in sense gratification, there is no question of bhakti. We have
to reduce our tendency for sense gratification and increase our devotional
activities. We have also stated that material bondage means accepting one
body and creating another. Krsna, through nature, will give us full
facility to enjoy our senses. Presently in the Western countries it has become fashionable to run around naked. Therefore nature will give these
people an opportunity to stand naked like trees for many years. Why are
we receiving different bodies? Because we have different tendencies for
sense gratification. We actually have to come to detest sense gratification
before our spiritual life begins. This is made possible through bhakti.
Although Krsna is beyond our vision, He has agreed to be seen by us
through the arcd-vigraha, the Deity. We should not think that the Deity
is made of stone. Even if it is stone, we should think that Krsna has made
Himself visible before us like a stone because we cannot see beyond
stone. That is Krsna’s mercy. Because our eyes and other senses are imperfect, we cannot see Krsna present everywhere in His original spiritual
form. Because we are imperfect, we see the difference between things
spiritual and material, but Krsna, being absolute, knows no such distinctions. He can become spiritual or material, however He likes, and it does
not make any difference to Him. Being almighty and omnipotent, Krsna
can change matter into spirit and spirit into matter. Therefore we should
not think, as the atheists do, that we are worshiping idols. Even if it is an
idol, it is still Krsna. That is the absolute nature of Krsna. Even if we
think that the Deity is a stone, or a piece of metal or some wood, He is
still Krsna. The understanding of this requires bhakti on our part. If we
164 Teachings of Lord Kapila

are a little thoughtful and philosophical, and if we are at all inclined
toward bhakti, we can understand that Krsna is present in stone.

Actually, nothing is different from Krsna because everything is
Krsna’s energy. The Mayavadi philosophers say that since everything is
God, the personality of Krsna is finished. But actually Krsna is Krsna,
and at the same time He is everything. We can understand this by bhakti,
but not by any other process. When a bhakta sees a tree, he sees Krsna.
As explained in Caitanya-caritamra (Madhya 8.274):

sthdvara-jangama dekhe, na dekhe tara mirti
sarvatra haya nia ista-deva-sphirti

The advanced devotee does not see living entities as moving and not
moving. He sees Krsna. This is also stated in the Brahma-samhitd

(5.38):

premdajiijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti

Because his eyes are always smeared with the ointment of devotion, the
devotee always sees Krsna and nothing else. He sees Krsna and Krsna’s
energy everywhere. For instance, if you love your child, when you see
your child’s shoe, you immediately see your child. Or if you see your
child’s toy, you immediately see your child and hear his voice. Similarly,
if we have actually developed love of Krsna, nothing exists but Krsna.
When our love for Krsna is actually developed, whatever we see, we will
see Krsna.

Unless one is advanced in krsna-prema, love of Krsna, he cannot see
or understand. By the blunt material senses, we cannot even understand
the name of Krsna. People are always asking, ““Why are these people
chanting Hare Krsna?’ They cannot understand, although Krsna
realization begins with the name. The name of Krsna and Krsna are nondifferent, but we cannot realize this intellectually. We have to practice
chanting Hare Krsna to realize it. When we actually advance in devotional service and chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra offenselessly, we
will realize that Krsna and His name are nondifferent. Thus krsna-bhakti
Association With the Supreme Lord Through Hearing 165

begins with the tongue, for we can utilize the tongue to chant, and to
taste krsna-prasdda. In this way we can become a Krsna bhakta.

When we see the Deity of Krsna in the temple, we should think that
the Deity is Krsna. In this way Krsna has agreed to be seen by us and
even dressed by us. However, if we think of Krsna’s virdt-ripa, His universal form, what can we do? How can we dress the virat-ripa? His
many heads cover the sky, and we cannot even conceive of Him. Krsna
can become bigger than the biggest and smaller than the smallest.
Therefore this verse states: bhaktya pumdjfi jata-viraga aindriyat. The
more we serve Krsna, give Him things to eat and dress Him nicely, the
less we become interested in our own bodies. In the material world
everyone is very busy dressing himself very nicely in order to be sexually attractive, but if we try to dress Krsna nicely, we will forget our
own material dress. If we feed Krsna nice food, we will forget to satisfy
our own tongue by going to this or that restaurant.

Krsna was teaching Bhagavad-gitd, and Arjuna was seeing Him face
to face, but seeing Krsna and reading Bhagavad-gitd are the same. Some
people say that Arjuna was fortunate to have seen Krsna face to face and
take instructions from Him, but Krsna can be seen immediately,
provided one has the eyes to see. There is the example in Caitanyacaritamrta of a braéhmana in South India who was reading Bhagavadgitd, although he was illiterate. The people in the neighborhood knew
that he was illiterate, and they made jokes, asking him, “Well, how is it
you are reading Bhagavad-gita?’’ One day Caitanya Mahaprabhu happened to be in a temple nearby, and He could understand that this man
was a devotee. He therefore approached him and asked, “My dear
brdhmana, what are you reading?”’ The braéhmana replied, “I am reading Bhagavad-gitd, or, rather, | am trying to read Bhagavad-gitd. | happen to be illiterate, but my guru-mahdraja has said that I must read the
eighteen chapters of Bhagavad-gitd daily. | am simply trying to carry out
his order, and therefore I am opening and closing the pages.”’ Caitanya
Mahdaprabhu then said, “I see that you are crying sometimes. Why is
this?”’ The brdhmana replied, “Yes, | am crying because when I take up
this book, I see a picture of Krsna driving Arjuna’s chariot. Sri Krsna is
so kind that He has accepted the position of a servant to His devotee.
Therefore when I see this picture, I weep.” Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
166 Teachings of Lord Kapila

then immediately embraced the bradhmana and said, “You have actually
read Bhagavad-gitd.”’

It is not that a wealth of education is required. One does not even have
to understand the language. The only ingredient needed is bhakti, love.
If one becomes a pure bhakta, he will forget all material sense enjoyment. Being a bhakta doesn’t simply mean wearing tilaka and robes. One
is not a bhakta if he has a taste for material sense enjoyment. A true
bhakta wants to satisfy not his senses but the senses of Krsna. That is the
spiritual world. In the spiritual world, Vrndavana, everyone—mother
Yasoda, Nanda Maharaja, Srimati Radharani, the gopis, the cowherd
boys, Sridima, Sudama, the land, the water, the trees, the birds—all are
trying to satisfy Krsna. That is the real meaning of Vrndavana. When
Krsna left Vrndavana for Mathura, everyone in Vrndavana fell dead out
of separation from Him. Similarly, we can always live in Vrndavana, in
Vaikuntha, if we are mad after Krsna. This is the teaching of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and He illustrated this by His very life. When He was in
Jagannatha Puri, He was always mad after Krsna day and night. The last
twelve years of His life were passed in madness. Sometimes He threw
Himself into the ocean, and He wandered about like a madman. Of
course, this is not possible for ordinary living entities. However, if we
become bhaktas, we will find intelligence behind everything in the creation. If we take a flower and see its constitution, how it is made and how
its colors are displayed and how it comes into existence, we can see
Krsna. We can see how Krsna has created such a beautiful thing so intelligently. We should not consider like rascals that such a thing has come
into being automatically. Fools cannot see, but those who are intelligent
can see that the hand of the Supreme Lord is in everything within the
creation. [savdsyam ida sarvam.

Actually, nothing comes about automatically. Everything comes about
through the intelligence of Krsna, through His fine and accurate powers.
If we paint a picture of a flower, we have to arrange many facets, and still
the picture will not be absolutely perfect. Yet the flower created by Krsna
has come out perfectly. What rascal can say that there is no brain behind
it? Krsna specifically says that we should not think that prakrti, nature,
is working automatically. He says, “Nature is working under My direction.’’ One simply has to develop the eyes to see how these things are
going on. This is possible if we engage the senses in the service of Krsna.
Association With the Supreme Lord Through Hearing 167

We first of all must engage the tongue in chanting Hare Krsna and in eating bhagavat-prasdda. Nothing else is required. Therefore the Krsna
consciousness movement is distributing prasdda and engaging people in
chanting the Hare Krsna mahd-mantra.

TEXT 27

asevaydyam prakrter gunanadm
Jfiidnena vairdgya-vijrmbhitena

yogena mayy arpitayd ca bhaktya
mdm pratyag-dtmanam thdvarundhe

TRANSLATION

Thus by not engaging in the service of the modes of material
nature but by developing Krsna consciousness, knowledge in
renunciation, and by practicing yoga, in which the mind is always
fixed in devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one achieves My association in this very life, for I am the
Supreme Personality, the Absolute Truth.

PURPORT

When one engages in the nine different processes of bhakti-yoga
enunciated in authoritative scriptures, such as hearing (sravanam),
chanting (kirtanam), remembering, worshiping, praying and offering
personal service—either in one of them or two or three or all of them—
he naturally has no opportunity to engage in the service of the three
modes of material nature. Unless one has good engagements in spiritual
service, it is not possible to become detached from material service.
Those who are not devotees, therefore, are interested in so-called
humanitarian or philanthropic work, such as opening a hospital or
charitable institution. These are undoubtedly good works in the sense
that they are pious activities, and the performer may get some opportunities for sense gratification, either in this life or in the next. Devotional service, however, is beyond the boundary of sense gratification. It
is a completely spiritual activity. When one engages in the spiritual

 

 

 

 
168 Teachings of Lord Kapila

activities of devotional service, he does not engage in sense gratificatory
activities. Krsna conscious activities are performed not blindly but with
the perfect understanding of knowledge and renunciation. This kind of
yoga practice, in which the mind is always fixed upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead in devotion, results in liberation in this very life.
The person who performs such acts gets in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Caitanya, therefore, approved the process of
hearing from realized devotees about the pastimes of the Lord. It does
not matter to what mundane category the audience belongs. If one
meekly and submissively hears about the activities of the Lord from a
realized soul, he will be able to conquer the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is unconquerable by any other process. Hearing and associating with devotees are the most important functions for self-realization.

In Goloka Vrndavana, the living entities are serving Krsna as friends,
cowherd boys, gopis, lovers, fathers, mothers and so on. Even the trees,
water, flowers, land, calves and cows serve Krsna in Goloka Vrndavana.
This is also our business, but somehow or other we do not like to serve
Krsna; therefore we have been put into the service of mdyd, in the three
modes of material nature. When a criminal does not like to obey the laws
of the state, he is placed into prison and forced to abide by the laws. Our
constitutional position is to render service to Krsna as His part and
parcel, and as soon as we refuse to render Him service, m@y4a is immediately there to capture us and say, “Serve me.’’ It is not our nature to
become master. Even if we become master, we will not be happy, because
that is artificial. For instance, if the hand thinks, ‘““Oh, now I have some
nice sweets. Now I can eat,” the hand will ultimately be frustrated. It is
the duty and nature of the hand to place the food in the mouth. In this
way the hand is nourished; otherwise everything is spoiled. Similarly, we
are part and parcel of Krsna, and our business is to satisfy Krsna. From
the Vedas we understand that God, who is one, has become many. We are
the many parts and parcels of Krsna. Svdmsas are His personal expansions, and we are His differential expansions, vibhinnamsas. In any case,
all expansions are meant to serve Krsna. This is explained in the
Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi 5.142): ekale isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya.
“Lord Krsna alone is the supreme controller, and all others are His
servants.”
Association With the Supreme Lord Through Hearing 169

It is our natural propensity to enjoy ourselves with Krsna. As stated
before, Krsna is dnanda-maya, and, being part and parcel of Krsna, we
are also Gnanda-maya. Now we are seeking dnanda (bliss) in different
atmospheres. Because we have a little independence, we have decided to
go to the prison house of material nature and try to serve our senses instead of Krsna. Now we have to learn how to forget to serve this material
nature, and that process is bhakti-madrga, the path of devotional service.
When we come to the understanding that we are actually no one’s servant but Krsna’s, we attain self-realization. We must come to this understanding not by sentiment but by real knowledge. After many births and
deaths, when one realizes that vdsudevah sarvam iti— Vasudeva is all —
he surrenders unto Krsna. This is real knowledge—jridna and vairdgya,
knowledge and detachment from material things.

Once one engages fully in Krsna’s service, he comes to the brahmabhita platform. Presently we are on the mayd-bhita platform, identifying ourselves with mdayd and working according to the modes of material
nature. However, when one comes to the realization that he is spirit
(aham brahmasmi), he will immediately become happy.

Under the modes of material nature, we are being carried away by the
waves of material nature, and we have no control over where we are
going. Bhaktivinoda Thakura has stated: md@ydra vase, ydccha bhese’,
khaccha habudubu, bhai. We are like straws on the waves of the ocean,
and we are fully under the control of the waves. Atheists shudder when
they think that there is a next life, because their lives are sinful and they
fear punishment in the next. There is a Bengali proverb about a person
who thought, “I have committed so many sinful acts that Yamaraja will
come and punish me. How can | avoid him?” Thinking about this some
time, he decided, **Let me smear my body with stool. Then Yamaraja will
not touch me.’ However, this is simply foolishness. We are under the
control of mdyd, material nature, and it is not possible to avoid it. We
have become infected by the disease of material nature, and no artificial
means will save us. There is no way out other than surrender to Krsna.
Krsna says that He will save us, even though we are very sinful.

If we turn our attention to Krsna’s service, to bhakti-yoga, we can
force ourselves to give up all anarthas, unwanted things. We should get
up early in the morning and engage ourselves in the service of Krsna;
170 Teachings of Lord Kapila

then gradually we will forget the service of mayd. Bhakti-yoga is so
strong that if we engage in it, mdyd@’s service will automatically be negated. This is called vairdgya.

Krsna is the original purusa, the original spirit, the original person.
Everything has come from Krsna, and therefore He is purdna, the oldest.
No one is older than Krsna, but He is always young. That is Bhagavan.
He is ddi, the original source, the cause of all causes. Yet we never see
Krsna as an old man. He is always fresh and youthful. Although Krsna
was a great-grandfather at the Battle of Kuruksetra, He did not appear
any older than a young man of twenty. Krsna is always a young boy, and
those living entities in the spiritual universe also have spiritual bodies
the same as Krsna’s. In the Sixth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam we read
that when the Vaikuntha-diitas came to take Ajamila, they were fourhanded and very beautiful. In the spiritual world, there are four-handed
living entities, and they are all nitya-mukta, eternally liberated.

Unfortunately, we are now prisoners in this material world, and we
presently have material bodies. These bodies are changing. Sometimes
they are young and sometimes old. However, if we become Krsna conscious, we will not get another material body after leaving this body. We
will go home, back to Godhead, and attain our original, spiritual body,
which is the same kind of beautiful body that Krsna, Narayana, has. We
should take this opportunity to become devotees of Krsna by following
the processes of bhakti-yoga—Ssravanam kirtanam visnoh smaranam
pada-sevanam arcanam. We can take one or all of the nine processes of
devotional service and make our lives successful. Caitanya Mahaprabhu
has prescribed the most important process—Sravanam. We need only
hear, and that will make our lives successful.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN

Perfect Knowledge Through Surrender

TEXT 28

devahitir uvdca
kdcit tvayy ucitad bhaktih
kidrsi mama gocara
yaya padam te nirvanam
afyasanvasnava aham

TRANSLATION

On hearing this statement of the Lord, Devahiti inquired: What
kind of devotional service is worth developing and practicing to
help me easily and immediately attain the service of Your lotus
feet?

PURPORT

It is stated in Bhagavad-gita that no one is barred from rendering service to the Lord. Whether one is a woman or a laborer or a merchant, if
he engages himself in the devotional service of the Lord, he is promoted
to the highest perfectional state and goes back home, back to Godhead.
The devotional service most suitable for different types of devotees is
determined and fixed by the mercy of the spiritual master. Therefore in
order to become free from the miseries of material nature, one should
approach a bona fide spiritual master inquisitively and submissively.
When Arjuna submitted to Krsna, he said, ““My dear Krsna, now | no
longer care to talk to You as a friend because friendly talks will not
benefit me now.” Generally we talk to a friend just to spend time, but
when we approach a spiritual master, we should be submissive. Friends
approach one another on an equal basis, but this is not the way to approach a spiritual master. Unless one is submissive, one cannot accept

171
172 Teachings of Lord Kapila

sublime instructions. Arjuna teaches us submission by giving up his
friendly relationship with Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
He says, “I have now become Your disciple. Please instruct me.”’

We can speculate for many births, for many years, and yet not be able
to understand the ultimate goal of life. Therefore the Sdstras all advise
that we search out a guru. The word guru means “heavy’”’ or “weighty.”
One who has much knowledge is heavy with knowledge. One should consider the bona fide guru in this way, and one should not think, “I know
everything. Who can teach me?”’ No one can say such a thing, for everyone needs instruction.

According to the Vedic system, a child is sent to a guru-kula to learn
spiritual knowledge from the very beginning. When a child goes to a
guru-kula, he becomes a brahmacdri and works like a menial servant.
He may be the son of a great bréhmana or a great king; it doesn’t matter.
When one goes to a guru-kula, he immediately becomes the menial servant of the guru. If the guru orders him to perform some lowly service,
he is prepared to do it. This is the business of a brahmacari. Even Krsna
went to a guru-kula to teach us. There was no need for Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, to go to a guru-kula, but He did this
simply to set an example. Caitanya Mahaprabhu also accepted a guru.

Prakasananda Sarasvati was a very learned scholar, and he knew that
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was also a great scholar, yet he criticized Caitanya
Mahaprabhu for chanting and dancing, for Prakasananda Sarasvati felt
that a sannydsi should devote his entire attention to the reading of
Vedanta. He therefore considered Caitanya Mahaprabhu a sentimentalist, not a bona fide sannydsi. Prakasainanda Sarasvati inquired, ““Why
aren't you reading Vedanta-siitra? Why are you chanting and dancing?”
Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied:

prabhu kahe —Suna, sripdda, ihéra kdérana
guru more mirkha dekhi’ karila sdsana

‘‘Actually, Iam not very learned, and my gurw has stated that I am fool
number one. He said that because of this I cannot possibly read Veddantasutra, for Veddnta-sitra is not meant for an ordinary person. My guru
therefore advised me to chant this Hare Krsna mahd-mantra, and now I

am doing this and getting the results.”” (Cc. Adi 7.71)
Perfect Knowledge Through Surrender 173

At the present moment in Kali-yuga, people are not well educated.
They are simply engaged in earning money to fill the belly. Vedanta philosophy is not meant for an ordinary person, nor even for an ordinary
learned person. It requires great knowledge of Sanskrit and philosophy.
Of course Caitanya Mahaprabhu, being the Supreme Personality of Godhead, knew all things, but at that moment He had assumed the role of an
ordinary person in order to instruct an illiterate, ignorant society. In this
age people are not even interested in reading Veddnta-siitra. People are
so badly infected by the influence of mdyd that they do not even care to
understand that there is life after death or that there are 8,400,000 life
forms. Sometimes if people hear that by acting in such a way they will
become a tree, a dog, a cat, an insect or even a human being, they say
that they do not even care to know this. Sometimes they say, “Never
mind if I become a dog. What’s wrong with that? I will simply forget
everything.” Many university students in the Western countries speak
this way. They have become so ignorant that they are described as
manda. Previously, in India, the bradhmanas were interested in understanding Brahman. Athdto brahma-jijfidsa. However, at the present
moment everyone is a Sidra, and no one is interested in understanding
Brahman. People are simply interested in getting more money and going
to the cinemas.

Human life is meant for understanding our situation, and we should
take instructions from Bhagavad-gitd. Arjuna is personally teaching us
by accepting Krsna as his guru. He asks Krsna to become his spiritual
master and teach him. The lessons given by Sri Krsna are not simply
meant for Arjuna but for everyone. Krsna tells us in Bhagavad-gita that
we should search out a guru. The first guru is Sri Krsna Himself, and
whoever represents Sri Krsna is also a guru. If I am a businessman, and
someone goes to canvass for my business and take orders for me, he is
my representative. If he simply says that he is my representative and yet
takes some orders but uses the money for something else, he is not really
my representative.

Krsna’s representative does not say, “I have become Krsna.” Such a
person is neither a representative nor a guru. He is simply a cheater.
Krsna’s representative is one who canvasses for Krsna. Krsna says, ““Give
up everything and surrender unto Me.’ Krsna’s representative says,
“Give up everything and simply surrender unto Krsna.” This is
174 Teachings of Lord Kapila

certainly not very difficult to understand. Anyone can become Krsna’s
representative. Nonetheless, for the past two hundred years, many yogis
and svdmis have gone to foreign countries, but no one has spoken about
Krsna. They have simply presented a hodgepodge of Indian philosophy.
No one has actually presented Vedic culture as it is.

We should read Bhagavad-gitdé as it is and understand the philosophy
as Arjuna understood it. Arjuna was a friend of Krsna’s. He was sitting
with Krsna and speaking to Him as a friend speaks to a friend. In the
Eleventh Chapter, after having seen the universal form, Arjuna tells
Krsna: “I have in the past addressed You as ‘O Krsna,’ “O Yadava,’ “O my
friend,’ without knowing Your glories. Please forgive whatever I may
have done in madness or in love.”

Arjuna understood that although Krsna was his friend, He was the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and therefore the proper person to be
his guru. He therefore told Krsna at the beginning of Bhagavad-gita
(2.7), Sisyas te "ham sadhi mam tvam prapannam: “Now I am Your disciple and a soul surrendered unto You. Please instruct me.”

These are the instructions we get from Bhagavad-gitd, and whoever
reads Bhagavad-gitd has to accept Krsna as the guru. We have to render
service to a guru and surrender ourselves. It is not that one should accept
just any person as a guru. The guru must be the representative of Krsna;
then one can surrender oneself. Surrender means that one will accept
whatever the guru says. It is not that one thinks, “I do not care for my
guru’s order. Still | am a disciple.”’ That is not actually accepting a guru.
Of course, it has become a fashion to accept a guru in this way, but this
will not help anyone. As soon as Krsna became Arjuna’s guru, Krsna immediately chastised him. Sri Krsna told him:

asocyGn anvasocas tvam
prajnd-vddams ca bhasase

gatdsiin agatdsims ca
nanusocanti panditah

‘“While speaking learned words, you are mourning for what is not worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living nor the
dead.”’ (Bg. 2.11)

In this way Krsna essentially told Arjuna that he was fool number one
Perfect Knowledge Through Surrender 175

for lamenting for those things for which one should not lament. Arjuna
was lamenting for the body, thinking that it was horrible that his relatives would be killed in war. This was not the proper subject matter for
him to be contemplating. The real subject matter for a wise man to contemplate is the salvation of the soul. Therefore Sri Krsna first explained
the distinction between the body and the soul.

This Krsna consciousness movement is also concerned with the soul,
and therefore we have used the word “‘consciousness’’ because consciousness belongs to the soul. Consciousness is the symptom of the soul’s presence. Because the soul is in the body, the body feels pleasure and pain.
When the soul leaves the body, the body can be hacked to pieces, and yet
it will not protest. This is because the consciousness is gone. We feel
pleasure and pain because consciousness is present, and Krsna advises us
that it is this consciousness that is eternal, not the body. We have to
purify our consciousness in order to understand that consciousness is
eternal. If we can do this, our lives will be successful. At the time of
death, our consciousness carries us into another body. There are the
mind, the intelligence and the ego, which constitute the subtle body, and
there is also the spirit soul, which is even more subtle. We know that we
possess a mind, although we cannot see it. Nor can we see the intelligence, the ego or the soul. We can only see the gross material body, and
when this gross material body ends, we say that everything is finished. In
order to understand these things, we have to approach a guru, just as Arjuna approached Sri Krsna.

Sri Krsna told Arjuna in very gentlemanly language that he was not a
learned man. In essence, He said, “You are not a pandita. Just try to
understand that the real life is the life of the soul.’’ Vedic education
means taking care of the soul. Presently the soul is encaged, embodied,
entangled in material affairs. The soul is suffering, and it is to our
benefit to rescue him from these material clutches. This is real education.
To receive this education, one has to approach a proper guru. The guru is
there—Krsna. The guru is also there as Kapiladeva, the incarnation of
Krsna. Krsna informs us that He is the owner of the body, and He has explained this in many different ways. He has stated that the soul can never
be cut to pieces, burned by fire, moistened by water nor withered by the
wind. Matter interacts with matter, but the soul does not belong to the
material world. This means that the soul is above material action and
176 Teachings of Lord Kapila

reaction. In the material world even iron and stone can be melted, but
the laws of material nature do not apply to the spirit soul.

To understand these subjects, we should be careful to approach
Krsna’s representative. We should not approach a bogus guru, who is
like a blind man trying to lead other blind men. We must go to one who
has open eyes, to one who has seen the Absolute Truth. The Absolute
Truth is there, just as the sun is there for everyone to see. The sun does
not hide, but a person can try to hide from the sun by closing his door.
One must open the door in order to see the sun. Similarly, Krsna is there,
God is there, and we have to come to Krsna and take the lessons of
Bhagavad-gita to learn who and what God is. Rascals will not do this, but
will simply manufacture some philosophy or other. There is actually no
difficulty because Krsna’s instructions are there, and Krsna Himself is
there. Krsna is so kind that He says, “All right, if you cannot understand
Me in this way, just see Me in water. Come on, if you do not understand
Me in that way, just see Me in the sunshine.”’ Is this very difficult? There
is nothing difficult about it, but we are very obstinate. Maya is also very
strong, and as soon as we try to accept Krsna as the Supreme Lord, maya
will whisper in our ear, “No, no. There are many gods. Why are you accepting Krsna?” However, the Sdstras say, krsnas tu bhagavan
svayam ... isvarah paramah krsnah. “Krsna is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.’’ We should take our lessons from the dcdryas and the
Sdstras. At least in India there are many great dGcdryas—Ramanujacarya,
Madhvacarya, Visnusvami, and even Sankaracarya and Guru Nanak. All
of these have accepted Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Why, then, should we reject Him? Why should we accept a competitor?
We should not simply engage in mental speculation but should accept
Krsna in full consciousness and be happy. This is made possible by the
help of the guru; therefore Devahiti is further questioning her son,
Kapiladeva.

TEXT 29

yo yogo bhagavad-bano
nirvandtmams tvayoditah
kidrsah kati cangani

yatas tattvavabodhanam
Perfect Knowledge Through Surrender 177

TRANSLATION

The mystic yoga system, as you have explained, aims at the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and is meant for completely ending material existence. Please let me know the nature of that yoga
system. How many ways are there by which one can understand in
truth that sublime yoga?

PURPORT

There are different kinds of mystic yoga systems aiming for different
phases of the Absolute Truth. The jidna-yoga system aims at the impersonal Brahman effulgence, and the hatha-yoga system aims at the
localized personal aspect, the Paramatma feature of the Absolute Truth,
whereas bhakti-yoga, or devotional service, which is executed in nine
different ways, headed by hearing and chanting, aims at complete
realization of the Supreme Lord. There are different methods of selfrealization. But here Devahiti especially refers to the bhakti-yoga
system, which has already been primarily explained by the Lord. The
different processes of the bhakti-yoga system are hearing, chanting,
remembering, offering prayers, worshiping the Lord in the temple, accepting service to Him, carrying out His orders, making friends with
Him and ultimately surrendering everything for His service.

The word nirvanatman is very significant in this verse. Unless one accepts the process of devotional service, one cannot end the continuation
of material existence. As far as jfidnis are concerned, they are interested
in jfidna-yoga, but even if one elevates oneself, after a great performance of austerity, to the Brahman effulgence, there is a chance of falling down again to the material world. Therefore, jfidna-yoga does not
actually end material existence. Similarly, regarding the hatha-yoga
system, which aims at the localized aspect of the Lord, Paramatma, it has
been experienced that many yogis, such as Visvamitra, fall down. But
bhakti-yogis, once approaching the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
never come back to this material world, as confirmed in the Bhagavadgita. Yad gatvad na nivartante: upon going, one never comes back.
Tyaktva deham punar janma naiti: after giving up this body, he never
comes back again to accept a material body. Nirvana does not finish the
existence of the soul. The soul is everexisting. Therefore nirvana means
178 Teachings of Lord Kapila

to end one’s material existence, and to end material existence means to go
back home, back to Godhead.

Sometimes it is asked how the living entity falls down from the spiritual world to the material world. Here is the answer. Unless one is elevated to the Vaikuntha planets and is directly in touch with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he is prone to fall down, either from the impersonal Brahman realization or from an ecstatic trance of meditation.
Another word in this verse, bhagavad-banah, is very significant. Banah
means “arrow.” The bhakti-yoga system is just like an arrow aiming up
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The bhakti-yoga system never
urges one toward the impersonal Brahman effulgence or to the point of
Paramatmi realization. This bdnah, or arrow, is so sharp and swift that it
goes directly to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, penetrating the
regions of impersonal Brahman and localized Paramatmi.

We must understand the Supreme Person, tattvatah, in truth.
Generally people are not interested in knowing about God or their
relationship with Him. However, the entire Vedic instruction is for this
purpose. First of all we have to know God, then we have to know our
relationship with God. The next step is acting on the basis of that relationship. Krsna states that out of many millions of people, one may be interested in knowing the purpose of life. Human life is meant for this end,
and if one does not come to this understanding, he is no better than an
animal. We not only have to understand God and our relationship with
Him but also how to act in that relationship. In this way we can perfect
our lives. When one is a siddha, one understands himself —that is, one
understands, aham brahmdsmi: “I am not this body.” This is Brahman
realization, the brahma-bhita platform. When one attains this stage, he
becomes very happy. However, we must progress beyond this and come
to the platform of bhakti-yoga. On that platform, there is variety and
dnanda, bliss. As stated previously, we are seeking spiritual variety, and
if we do not enter the spiritual world, we will again fall down into the
material atmosphere.

The varieties of the spiritual world are mentioned in the Brahma
samhita (5.29-30):

cintamani prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vrksalaksdurtesu surabhir abhipdlayantam
Perfect Knowledge Through Surrender 179

laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-sevyamaénam
govindam ddi-purusam tam aham bhajaémi

venum kvanantam aravinda-dalaéyataksam
barhdvatamsam asitambuda-sundaradngam

kandarpa-koti-kamaniya-visesa-sobham
govindam ddi-purusam tam aham bhajami

‘I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor, who is tending the cows, yielding all desires, in abodes built with spiritual gems and
surrounded by millions of purpose trees. He is always served with great
reverence and affection by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of
fortune.

“I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is adept in playing on His
flute, with blooming eyes like lotus petals, with head decked with
peacock’s feather, with the figure of beauty tinged with the hue of blue
clouds, and His unique loveliness charming millions of Cupids.”

We should not consider Krsna’s form to be imagined by some artist.
He is described in the Vedas as venum kvanantam aravinda-dalayatéksam. He plays a flute, and His eyes are like the petals of a lotus flower. He
wears a peacock feather, and His complexion is very beautiful, like a
dark cloud. He is so beautiful that He attracts many hundreds of thousands of Cupids (kandarpa-koti-kamaniya-visesa-Sobham). These are
descriptions of Govinda found in the Sdstras.

In the material world we are simply chewing the chewed, throwing it
away, picking it up and then chewing it again. Spiritual variety is not like
this. Spiritual variety is dnanddmbudhi-vardhanam: it is constantly increasing. It is even greater than the ocean, because the ocean does not increase. The shores of the ocean are set; they have certain limits.
However, the ocean of bliss is constantly increasing. The more we enter
into that spiritual bliss, the more we become joyful.

The young people in the Hare Krsna movement chant the Hare Krsna
mantra all the time. If this mantra were material, how long would they
chant it? It is not possible to chant a material name for very long because
the chanting would become hackneyed and very tiresome. No one could
be satished simply by chanting Hare Krsna unless Hare Krsna itself were
spiritual. We may chant, “Mr. John, Mr. John, Mr. John,” but after an
180 | Teachings of Lord Kapila

hour we will be fed up. However, the more we become spiritually advanced, the more bliss we will derive from chanting Hare Krsna.

We can experience Gnanda perfectly in the association of Krsna. We
can associate with Krsna as a servant, a friend, a father, a mother or a
conjugal lover. There are five basic rasas—Sdnta, ddsya, sakhya, vatsalya and mddhurya. In this material world, we experience the same
rasas, or relationships. We are related to someone as a father, a son, a
lover, a beloved, a master, a servant or whatever. These are perverted
reflections of the relationship with Krsna found in the spiritual world.
Today in the material world I may be relishing my love for my son, but
tomorrow my son may be my greatest enemy. There is no eternity in this
kind of love. Or, if my son does not become my enemy, he may die.
Today I may love some man or woman, but tomorrow we may break up.
All of this is due to the defects of the material world. However, in the
spiritual world these relationships never break up. They simply increase
and increase, and this is called perfection.

Krsna is very fond of tending swrabhi cows, but the Mayavadis cannot
understand this. They say, ““What is this Krsna?”’ Even Lord Brahma
was bewildered. He said, “How is it that this Krsna, this boy of
Vrndavana, is being worshiped? He is called the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. How is that?” Lord Indra was also bewildered. Therefore if we
do not wish to be bewildered we have to understand Krsna in truth from
Krsna Himself or His bona fide representative.

The activities of Krsna are not ordinary but divine. If we can understand this, we immediately become liberated. We need only understand
the pastimes of Krsna with the gopis. These pastimes are not ordinary. In
the material world, a young man wants to dance with many young girls,
but Krsna’s dancing with the gopis is different. Because people cannot
understand Krsna, when they hear about Krsna’s dancing with the gopis,
they take this as some kind of concession, and say, ““Now let us dance
with young girls.” In this way they go to hell. Therefore we have to learn
from the proper person about Krsna’s activities. We should not immediately try to understand Krsna’s dealings with the gopis, for they are
very confidential. These dealings are given in the Tenth Canto of
Srimad-Bhaégavatam, and this indicates that we have to understand
Krsna as He is by first reading the preceding nine cantos. When we have
Perfect Knowledge Through Surrender 181

understood these nine cantos, we can go on to the tenth. In this way we
can understand that Krsna’s activities are not ordinary but divine, and
we can immediately become liberated.

We may either hear about Krsna, chant His names, worship Him or
offer prayers. In any case, we should work under the directions of our
spiritual master or Sri Krsna Himself. For instance, Hanuman simply
carried out Lord Ramacandra’s orders. Hanuman apparently had no
education, and he was not capable of teaching Vedanta, but he simply
carried out the orders of Lord Ramacandra and attained perfection.
Arjuna, on the other hand, took Krsna as his most intimate friend. Arjuna was not a Vedantist but a fighter, a warrior. He had no time to study
Vedanta because he had to deal with war and politics, but still he was the
preatest devotee. People may say, “Oh, Arjuna was not a Vedantist, nor
even a brdhmana or a sannydsi. How could Krsna accept him as a devotee?” Nonetheless, in Bhagavad-gita (4.3), Krsna says that Arjuna is His
very dear friend and devotee: bhakto ’si me sakha ceti. If one becomes a
devotee, there is no material impediment.

Actually bhakti should be automatic and spontaneous. There should be
no motive in serving Krsna, but even if there is a motive, service rendered unto Krsna is good. Even if one approaches Krsna with some
ulterior motive, one is considered pious. For instance, Dhruva Maharaja
initially worshiped Krsna with a motive, but after attaining perfection in
devotional service, his ulterior motive vanished. When he actually saw
Krsna, he said, “I do not want anything from You. I don’t want any
benediction other than Your service.” After hearing about the many
transcendental qualities of Krsna, if we somehow or other become attracted to Krsna consciousness, our lives will be successful. Tasmdat
kenadpy updyena manah krsne nivesayet: “Somehow or other we have to
attach our minds to Krsna consciousness.” (Bhdag. 7.1.32) Then Krsna
will help us and give us intelligence from within, as He indicates in

Bhagavad-gita (10.10):

tesam satata-yuktanam
bhajatam priti-pirvakam
dadami buddhi-yogam tam

yena mam upayanti te
182 Teachings of Lord Kapila

‘To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give
the understanding by which they can come to Me.”’ This is actual buddhiyoga. Bhakti-yoga means buddhi-yoga, because one who is highly intelligent decides to take to Krsna consciousness. In this way, one can perfect
his life by engaging in devotional service under the directions of the
Sdstras and the spiritual master. Devahiti understands this and is thus
submitting to her son just as Arjuna submitted to Sri Krsna on the

battlefield.

TEXT 30

tad etan me vijanihi
yathéham manda-dhir hare
sukham buddhyeya durbodham

yosa bhavad-anugrahat

TRANSLATION

My dear son, Kapila, after all, | am a woman. It is very difficult
for me to understand the Absolute Truth because my intelligence
is not very great. But if You will kindly explain it to me, even
though I am not very intelligent, I can understand it and thereby
feel transcendental happiness.

PURPORT

Knowledge of the Absolute Truth is not very easily understood by
ordinary, less intelligent men; but if the spiritual master is kind enough
to the disciple, however unintelligent he may be, then by the divine
grace of the spiritual master everything is revealed. Visvandtha
Cakravarti Thakura therefore says, yasya prasdddd, by the mercy of the
spiritual master, the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
bhagavat-prasddah, is revealed. Devahiti requested her great son to be
merciful toward her because she was a less intelligent woman and also
His mother. By the grace of Kapiladeva it was quite possible for her to
understand the Absolute Truth, even though the subject matter is very
difficult for ordinary persons, especially women.

In this verse Devahiti shows us the process for understanding tranPerfect Knowledge Through Surrender 183

scendental subject matters. It is not by challenge but by submission. The
entire bhakti process is a process of submission. That is also Caitanya

Mahaprabhu’s teaching:

trndd api sunicena
taror iva sahisnund
amdnind mdnadena
kirtaniyah sadé harih
(Siksastaka 3)

If one is interested in advancing in chanting Hare Krsna, Caitanya Mahaprabhu advises that one be humbler than the grass and more tolerant
than the trees. One should not be very. proud of his intelligence but
should give all respect to others. In this way, one can chant Hare Krsna
offenselessly. Although Devahiti was the mother of Kapiladeva, she presented herself as a humble woman. It was not that she considered herself
superior because she was His mother.

We have to please the spirtiual master by service, and the entire
bhakti process depends on the attitude of service. The transcendental
nature of Krsna is not possible to understand with our blunt material
senses. Krsna’s name, form, qualities and pastimes are all divya, divine.
Our present material senses have to be purified by engagement in the
Lord’s service, and our first engagement begins with the tongue. It is
with the tongue that we can chant the transcendental names of the Lord.
This is not very difficult, and this path is open to everyone—even
women, vaisyas and sidras. After describing all the faults of Kali-yuga,
Srimad-Bhagavatam (12.3.51) states:

kaler dosa-nidhe rdjann
asti hy eko mahaén gunah
kirtandd eva krsnasya
mukta-sangah param vrajet

‘“There is one special advantage about this age of Kali-yuga, and that is
that people can attain liberation and return home, back to Godhead,
simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mahé-mantra.” Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said:
184 Teachings of Lord Kapila

harer néma harer ndma
harer némaiva kevalam

kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha

‘Chant Hare Krsna, chant Hare Krsna. There is no other way, no other
way at all in Kali-yuga.”’

We should try to avoid the ten offenses in chanting the holy name, but
anyone who chants Hare Krsna sincerely is purified. Ceto-darpanamdrjanam bhava-mahd-davagni-nirvapanam (Siksdstaka 1). This is the
easiest process by which the mirror of the mind can be cleansed. If Krsna
sees that someone is sincerely chanting Hare Krsna, He will help. He is
within everyone, and He can understand whether one is sincere or not.
Krsna helps a sincere devotee internally and externally. Internally He
helps as Paramatma by giving intelligence from within. Daddmi buddhiyogam tam. Externally He helps as His representative, the spiritual
master. Therefore Caitanya Mahaprabhu says: guru-krsna-prasdde pdya
bhakti-lata-bija. ““By the grace of Krsna, one gets a bona fide guru, and
by the grace of the guru, one gets Krsna.” (Cc. Madhya 19.151) Thus
the Sdstras have given us a very easy way to appreciate our transcendental life. That is the Krsna consciousness movement.

Devahiti has submissively accepted her son as her guru. She wants to
understand Krsna perfectly, by the grace of Kapiladeva. It is very important to receive the causeless mercy of Krsna and the spiritual master.
By Krsna’s mercy, we receive a spiritual master, and by the spiritual
master’s mercy, we receive Krsna.

Srila Viévanatha Cakravati Thakura has greatly stressed the mercy of
the guru, and it is an actual fact that if we satisfy the guru by our service,
he will give us his blessings. This is a very great opportunity, for the
guru is the confidential servant of Krsna. The guru never claims that he
is Krsna, although he is worshiped as Krsna: sdksdd dharitvena samastaSastrair uktas tatha bhavyata eva sadbhih (Gurv-astaka 7).

All the sdstras describe the guru as being on an equal basis with Krsna,
for he is the representative of Krsna. Therefore he is worshiped as
Krsna. Being the most confidential servant of Krsna, the guru is very
dear to Krsna; therefore if he recommends someone to Krsna, Krsna accepts the person. The guru is the confidential servant of Krsna because
Perfect Knowledge Through Surrender 185

he canvasses from door to door, saying, ““Please become Krsna conscious
and surrender unto Krsna.” Krsna tells Arjuna that such a person is very
dear to Him. The bona fide guru tells people to surrender not unto him
but unto Krsna. Thus one has to surrender unto Krsna through the via
media of the guru, not directly. This is the process. The guru does not accept respect from his disciple for his personal self but conveys this
respect to Krsna. If we cannot receive the mercy of the guru, Krsna is
very difficult to approach directly.

It is stated in Bhagavad-gita that knowledge of Krsna is received
through the parampard, the disciplic succession. Evam parampardpraptam. The guru offers the same respects to his guru, and his guru
offers respects to his, and so it goes all the way to Krsna. Thus the mercy
of Krsna comes down through the parampard system, and the respect
offered to Krsna is offered up through the parampard system. One has to
learn to approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead in this way. Thus
if we want to approach God, we have to take shelter of the guru in the
beginning. Devahiti is begging the mercy of Kapiladeva in order to
understand the way to approach Krsna. She approaches Him very humbly saying, “My dear Kapila, You are the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but I am a woman, and my intelligence is not very sharp.
Nonetheless, | want to understand these sublime transcendental subjects
from You. It is possible by Your mercy.”’

The process of approaching and understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead was also discussed between Rimananda Raya and
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. First, Ramananda Raya explained the process in
terms of varnadsrama-dharma. He said first of all that human life is
meant for approaching Lord Visnu through the rules and regulations
governing varndsrama-dharma. Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied that it is
very difficult in this age to execute the rules and regulations of
varnasrama-dharma. It is very difficult to be a brahmana in this age,
and it is practically impossible to revive the old varndsrama-dharma
culture. Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore said that this method is not very
practical. Caitanya Mahaprabhu has been called by Srila Rapa Gosvami
‘‘the most munificent avatdra”’ because He distributes love of Krsna free
of charge. First of all, we cannot even understand Krsna; therefore there
is no question of loving Him. If we do not understand someone, how can
we love him? The love is very far away, but Caitanya Mahaprabhu is so
186 Teachings of Lord Kapila

kind that He distributes krsna-premd, love of Krsna, to whomever will
take it. In His life, Caitanya Mahaprabhu cried for Krsna and showed
how one should be mad after Him.

yugayitam nimesena
caksusaé pravrsadyitam

Suinydyitam jagat sarvam
govinda-virahena me

‘QO Govinda! Feeling Your separation, I am considering a moment to be
like twelve years or more. Tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents
_ of rain, and I am feeling all vacant in the world in Your absence.”
(Siksdstaka 7)

Without Krsna, one should see everything as vacant. This is
Radharani’s frame of mind, but this is not possible for an ordinary living
being. It was possible for Caitanya Mahaprabhu and a few devotees, His
immediate disciples like the six Gosvamis, who were following in His
footsteps. They worshiped Krsna in separation and sought Krsna
everywhere. :

he rddhe vraja-devike ca lalite he nanda-siino kutah
sri-govardhana-kalpa-pddapa-tale kdlindi-vanye kutah

ghosantav iti sarvato vraja-pure khedair mahd-vihvalau
vande riipa-sandatanau raghu-yugau Sri-jiva-gopalakau

“I offer my respectful obeisances to the six Gosvamis, namely Sri Ripa
Gosvami, Sri Sandtana Gosvami, Sri Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvimi, Sri
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, Sri Jiva Gosvimi and Sri Gopala Bhatta
Gosvami, who were chanting very loudly everywhere in Vrndavana,
shouting, “Queen of Vrndavana, Radharani! O Lalita! O son of Nanda
Maharaja! Where are you all now? Are you just on the hill of
Govardhana, or are you under the trees on the bank of the Yamuna?
Where are you?’ These were their moods in executing Krsna consciousness.” (Sad-gosvdmy-astaka 8)

The Gosvamis never said, ““We have seen Krsna.” This is the recommended process—worship in separation. We should awaken our lost
Perfect Knowledge Through Surrender 187

Krsna consciousness in this way and become mad after Krsna in our
separation from Him. This is called krsna-premd, and this love was distributed by Caitanya Mahadprabhu. We should not try to understand
Krsna by our small knowledge. Since we are imperfect, how can we
speculate on Krsna? There are many people like jndnis and theosophists
who try to understand the Absolute Truth by speculation, but this is not
possible.

athdpi te deva padambuja-dvayaprasdda-lesdnugrhita eva hi

Janati tattvam bhagavan-mahimno
na canya eko ’pi ciram vicinvan

‘“My Lord, if one is favored by even a slight trace of the mercy of Your
lotus feet, he can understand the greatness of Your personality. But those
who speculate in order to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead are unable to know You, even though they continue to study the
Vedas for many years.” (Bhag. 10.14.29) Even if one speculates for
many years, he cannot understand Krsna. One has to receive the mercy
of Krsna through the spiritual master, and this is the path recommended
by Sri Caitanya Mahdprabhu. Sthdne-sthitah Sruti-gatah tanu-vazimanobhih (Bhag. 10.14.3). Another name for Krsna is Ajita. No one can
conquer Krsna, but Krsna can be conquered by His devotee. One should
be submissive and say, “Krsna, I am very poor. I have no means to
understand You. Please be merciful upon me. Please allow me to understand You and surrender.” This is wanted. Krsna is very merciful, and
when He sees that someone has surrendered, He will help from within.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN

Bhakti as Ultimate Liberation

TEXT 31

maitreya uvdca
viditvartham kapilo matur ittham
Jata-sneho yatra tanvabhidatah
tattvamndyam yat pravadanti sankhyam
provaca vai bhakti-vitana-yogam

TRANSLATION

Sri Maitreya said: After hearing His mother’s statement, Kapila
could understand her purpose, and He became compassionate
toward her because of having been born from her body. He then
described the Sankhya system of philosophy, which is a combination of devotional service and mystic realization, as received by
disciplic succession.

PURPORT
The philosophy propounded by the atheist Kapila is an analysis of the ©

material elements and is very much appreciated by Western philosophers. The samkhya-yoga explained by Lord Kapiladeva, the son of
Devahiti, is practically unknown in the West. The sdrikhya-yoga propounded herein is actually bhakti. It is stated here that the proper way to
receive this knowledge is by disciplic succession, not by philosophical
speculation. Speculation is an improper way to understand the Absolute
Truth. Generally Western philosophers try to understand the Absolute
Truth by the ascending process of mental speculation. This is the process
of inductive logic. The other process is the descending process, and this is
the parampara process. By this method, knowledge descends from a
higher source.

189
190 Teachings of Lord Kapila

In Bhagavad-gitd, many yoga systems are explained, but the bhaktiyoga system is considered highest of all. Ultimately, all yogas end in
bhakti-yoga. The ultimate conclusion of jridna-yoga and hatha-yoga is
bhakti-yoga. In the Sixth Chapter of Bhagavad-gitd, the hatha-yoga
system of meditation is explained, and Arjuna, who was highly elevated,
said that he could not concentrate his mind in this way. If the hatha-yoga
system was so difficult five thousand years ago for a person so elevated
that he was Krsna’s friend, how is it possible today? Arjuna frankly said
that this system of yoga was impossible to execute because the mind is as
difficult to control as the wind.

The hatha-yoga system is basically meant for those who are overly attached to the body; otherwise, the preferred yoga is sankhya-yoga or
bhakti-yoga. When Arjuna told Sri Krsna that the hatha-yoga system
was too difficult to execute, the Lord pacified him by saying that the firstclass yogi is one ‘“‘who is always thinking of Me.’’ (Bg. 6.47) Arjuna did
not know anything but Krsna, and Arjuna requested that Krsna be present on his side in the battle. When Duryodhana approached Krsna with
Arjuna and requested Him to take sides, Krsna said, “I have eighteen
military divisions. These divisions will take one side, and I personally
will take another. However, I will not fight in this battle.” At first Arjuna
thought it wise to take the eighteen divisions with their many thousands
of elephants and horses, but then he considered that if he simply had
Krsna on his side, that would be sufficient. He would not need ordinary
soldiers. Duryodhana, on the other hand, decided to take Krsna’s
soldiers. Thus in order to pacify Arjuna, Krsna told him not to worry, although he could not execute the astdriga-yoga system.

‘The first-class yogi is he who always thinks of Me.’’ One should always remember that Krsna is within his heart and think of Him. This is
the proper system of meditation. If we always chant the Hare Krsna
mahd-mantra, we will always remember Krsna, and immediately the
form of Krsna will be awakened within our hearts. The process of always
thinking of Krsna is the process of Krsna consciousness. The first-class
yogi is he who is always conscious of Krsna. One can be conscious of
Krsna by hearing about Him submissively.

We have to accept Krsna through the disciplic succession. There are
four sampradayas, disciplic successions. One comes from Lord Brahma
(the Brahma-sampradaya), and another comes from Laksmi, the goddess
Bhakti as Ultimate Liberation 191

of fortune, (the Sri-sampradaya). There are also the Kumara-sampradaya
and the Rudra-sampradaya. At the present moment, the Brahmasampradaya is represented by the Madhva-sampradaya, and we belong to
the Madhva-gaudiya-sampradaya. Our original sampraddya stems from
Madhvacarya. In that sampraddya there was Madhavendra Puri, and
Madhavendra Purt’s disciple was Sri Iévara Puri. Sri Iévara Purt’s disciple was Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Thus we are coming in the disciplic
succession from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and therefore our
sampradaya is called the Madhva-gaudiya-sampradaya. It is not that we
have manufactured a sampradaya; rather, our sampradaya stems from
Lord Brahma. There is also the Ramanuja- -sampradaya, which comes
from the Sri-sampradaya, and there is the Visnusvami-sampradaya,
which comes from the Rudra-sampradaya. The Nimbaditya-sampradaya
comes from the Kumara-sampradaya. If we do not belong to any
sampradaya, our conclusion is fruitless. It is not that one should think,
‘I am a big scholar, and I can interpret Bhagavad-gitd in my own way.
All these sampradayas are useless.’ We cannot manufacture our own
comments. There are many commentaries made in this way, and they are
all useless. They have no effect. We have to accept the philosophy as it
was contemplated by Lord Brahma, Narada, Madhvacarya, Madhavendra
Puri and Iévara Puri. These great dcdryas are beyond the imperfections
of so-called scholars. Mundane scientists and philosophers use the words
‘‘perhaps’’ and “‘maybe”’ because they cannot arrive at a proper conclusion. They are simply speculating, and mental speculation cannot be
perfect.

Bhakti-yoga is at the top of the stairs of all the yogas. The first step is
karma-yoga, and then jridna-yoga and dhydna-yoga, but the ultimate is
bhakti-yoga. Everyone is trying to reach the ultimate Absolute Truth,
but the other yogas end in partial understanding. The understanding
derived from bhakti-yoga is complete, and even if partially executed, it
has potency. It is also recommended by the great mahajanas like Lord
Brahma, Lord Siva and Kapiladeva. Since the path of perfection is very
difficult to understand, the Sdstras recommend that we follow the mahdaJanas, who are thus described in Srimad-Bhagavatam (6.3.20):

svayambhir nadradah sambhuh
kumarah kapilo manuh
192 Teachings of Lord Kapila

prahldado janako bhismo

balir vaiydsakir vayam

Another name for Lord Brahma is Svayambhi because he was born from
a lotus flower emanating from the navel of Lord Visnu. Since he was not
born of a father and mother, he is therefore called Svayambhu. Narada
Muni is also a mahdjana, and Sambhu is Lord Siva. Kumara refers to the
four Kumaras—Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana and Sanat-kumara. There
are twelve authorities following the Sankhya philosophy, or bhakti-yoga,
and these include Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, Kapiladeva, Manu,
Bhismadeva, Janaka Maharaja, Sukadeva Gosvami and Prahlada
Maharaja. If we simply accept one of these mahdjanas, we will be successful in understanding the Absolute Truth, but if we try to understand
the Absolute Truth by logic and argument, we will ultimately be frustrated. One philosopher may be a better logician than another, and one
philosophical argument may counteract another, but this process goes on
and on. It is simply a useless waste of time. Even if we approach Vedic
scriptures, there are difficulties. There are so many scriptures— Yajur
Veda, Rg Veda, Sama Veda, Atharva Veda, the Upanisads, the Puranas,
Brahma-sitra, Ramayana, Mahabharata and so forth. Different people
read them and arrive at different conclusions. There are also the Bible
and the Koran. According to so many different men, there are so many
interpretations. One philosopher defeats another philosopher on the basis
of scripture. It is even stated that one cannot become a rsi, a philosopher,
unless one propounds a different system of philosophy. Ndsdv rsir yasya
matam na bhinnam. Thus the truth of spiritual life is very complicated
and difficult to understand. The conclusion is that one should follow one
of these twelve mahdjanas in order to be successful. Krsna is the original
mahdjana, and He instructed Lord Brahma. Lord Brahma is also a
mahdjana. Actually, Krsna instructed everyone in Bhagavad-gitd, and
thus everyone has learned from Krsna.

In Srimad-Bhaégavatam (1.1.1) it is also stated: tene brahma hrda
ya ddi-kavaye. Thus Krsna gives His personal instructions just as
Kapiladeva gave His personal instructions. There is no contradiction between Krsna’s philosophy in Bhagavad-gitad and Kapiladeva’s philosophy. We need only receive the transcendental knowledge through the
mahajanas, and the results will be beneficial. Kapiladeva explained this
Bhakti as Ultimate Liberation 193

Sankhya philosophy to His mother, and although He had a natural affection for His mother, we should not think that Devahiti was an ordinary
woman. She was very submissive, and when Kapiladeva saw this, He became very compassionate. He saw that she was eager to know about the
Absolute Truth, and He considered that, after all, He had received His
body from her. Therefore He concluded that He should try to give her
the ultimate conclusion of philosophical knowledge, which is this
Sankhya philosophy.

TEXT 32

sri-bhagavan uvdca
devanam guna-liigandm
dnusravika-karmaném
sattva evaika-manaso
urttih svabhaviki tu ya
animitta bhaégavati

bhaktih siddher gariyasi

TRANSLATION

Lord Kapila said: The senses are symbolic representations of the
demigods, and their natural inclination is to work under the direction of the Vedic injunctions. As the senses are representatives of
the demigods, so the mind is the representative of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The mind’s natural duty is to serve. When
that spirit of service is engaged in devotion to the Personality of
Godhead, without any motive, that is far better than salvation.

PURPORT

The senses of the living entity are always engaged in some occupation,
either in activities prescribed in the Vedic injunctions or in material activities. The natural inclination of the senses is to work for something,
and the mind is the center of the senses. The mind is actually the leader
of the senses; therefore it is called sattva. Similarly, the leader of all the
demigods who are engaged in the activities of this material world—in
managing the sun, moon, etc.—is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
 

 

194, Teachings of Lord Kapila

It is stated in the Vedic literature that the demigods are different limbs
of the universal body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Our senses
are also controlled by different demigods; our senses are representations
of various demigods, and the mind is the representation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The senses, led by the mind, act under the influence of the demigods. When the service is ultimately aimed at the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the senses are in their natural position.
The Lord is called Hrsikesa, for He is actually the proprietor and ultimate master of the senses. The senses and the mind are naturally inclined to work, but when they are materially contaminated, they work
for some material benefit or for the service of the demigods, although actually they are meant to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
senses are called hrsika, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
called Hrsikesa. Indirectly, all the senses are naturally inclined to serve
the Supreme Lord. That is called bhakti.

Kapiladeva said that in devotional service the senses, without desire
for material profit or other selfish motives, are engaged in the service of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That spirit of service is far better
than siddhi, salvation. Bhakti, the inclination to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is in a transcendental position far superior to mukti,
or liberation. Thus bhakti is the stage after liberation. Unless one is
liberated, one cannot engage the senses in the service of the Lord. When
the senses are engaged either in material activities of sense gratification
or in the activities of the Vedic injunctions, there is some motive, but
when the same senses are engaged in the service of the Lord without
ulterior motive, that is called animittd and is the natural inclination of
the mind. The conclusion is that when the mind, undeviated either by
Vedic injunctions or by material activities, is fully engaged in Krsna consciousness, or devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
one is situated far above mere liberation from material entanglement.

Bhakti, devotional service, is transcendental even to mukti, liberation.
Generally people are concerned with dharma, artha, kadma and moksa.
In the beginning, there is dharma (religion), then artha (economic
development), kama (sense gratification), then moksa (merging into the
Supreme One). However, bhakti is above all these. Mukti is not very important for a bhakta. In the words of Bilvamangala Thakura: muktih
Bhakti as Ultimate Liberation 195

svayam mukulitafjali sevate ’smat. ‘‘Mukti herself is standing with
folded hands, waiting to serve the devotee.” (Krsna-karnamrta 107)
This is the experience of Bilvamangala Thakura, who was a very rich
South Indian brdhmana. Due to bad association, Bilvamangala Thakura
became a very staunch prostitute hunter, and he spent all his money on a
prostitute named Cintamani. One night, during a terrible rainstorm,
Bilvamangala went to see Cintamani, but the prostitute was thinking,
“Surely tonight Bilvamangala will not come. This is a terrible storm.”
Nonetheless, Bilvamangala came, despite all difficulties. Somehow he
managed to cross the raging river, and when he saw the gates of
Cintémani’s house closed, he somehow managed to jump over them.
Despite all the dangers, he reached Cintamani’s house, and the
prostitute, being very astonished, said, “How is it you have come
tonight? Oh, you are so attracted to this skin! If you just had this much
attraction for Krsna, it would certainly be to your benefit.”’ Bilvamangala
then immediately left the prostitute’s house and went to Vrndavana. The
fact was that in his previous life he had executed devotional service up to
bhava-bhakti. Thus the prostitute Cintamani actually became his guru.
While in Vrndavana, Bilvamangala Thakura wrote a book named Krsnakarnamrta, which has been recommended by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabsa.
In that book, Bilvamangala Thakura writes: “If we have devotion fixed
on You, My Lord Bhagavan, then we can easily see Your divine form as
kaisora-mirti, a young boy.”’

Another name for Krsna is Kaisora. The word kaisora refers to the age
before marriage —that is, it refers to a boy between the ages of eleven
and sixteen. Sri Krsna is always kaisora-mirti. By devotional service, one
can see the kaisora-mirti of Krsna very easily.

When Bilvamangala Thakura was going to Vrndavana, he was still attracted to women. One night he stayed at the house of a very rich
merchant, and the merchant’s wife told her husband that Bilvamangala
Thakura was attracted to her. She asked her husband what to do, and the
merchant simply said, “Serve him.” Finally Bilvamangala Thakura came
to his senses, and he thought, “These eyes are my enemies.” When the
beautiful woman approached him, Bilvamangala Thakura said, “Mother,
please give me the pins out of your hair. I am very mad after the beauty
of women. So let me pluck out my eyes.” In this way, he blinded himself.
196 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Although he could not see, in Vrndavana he was supplied milk by Krsna
Himself. Thus he personally realized Krsna through bhakti and wrote of
his personal experience. He wrote, “Mukti is not a very important thing.
She is always at my service with folded hands, saying, “My dear sir, what
can I do for you?’ ’’ Thus a devotee is not very anxious for mukti because
he is already liberated. If a man has a million dollars, why should he
hanker after ten rupees?

Bhakti should be animittd, without motive. Actually Krsna can fulfill
all of our wishes without difficulty because He is almighty and full of all
opulences. If we want material happiness from Krsna, it is certainly not
difficult for Him to grant it. He can also give us mukti, liberation, but it
is foolishness to ask anything from Krsna except bhakti. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura used to say that asking God for mukti or
anything else other than bhakti is like going to a rich man and asking for
ashes. There is another story, about an old woman who was carrying a
bundle of dry wood through the forest. Somehow or other the bundle,
which was very heavy, fell to the ground. The old woman became very
disturbed, and thought, ““Who will help put this bundle back on my
head?” She then began to call on God, saying, “‘God help me.”’ Suddenly
God appeared and said, ““What do you want?”’ She said, “‘Please help me
put this bundle back on my head.”’ So this is our foolishness. When God
comes to give us some benediction, we simply ask Him to load us down
again with all these material bundles. We ask Him for more material
things, for a happy family, for a large amount of money, for a new car or
whatever.

Caitanya Mahdprabhu teaches us that we should only beg God for His
service life after life. This is the actual meaning of the Hare Krsna
mahd-mantra. When we are chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare, we
are actually addressing God and His energy, Hara. Hara is Krsna’s internal potency, Srimati Radharani or Laksmi. Jaya rddhe! This is daivi
prakrti, and the devotees take shelter of the daivi prakrti, Srimati
Radharani. Thus the Vaisnavas worship Radha-Krsna, Laksmi-Nardyana
and Sita-Rama. In the beginning of the Hare Krsna mahd-mantra we
first address the internal energy of Krsna, Hare. Thus we say, “O
Radharani! O Hare! O energy of the Lord!”” When we address someone in
this way, he usually says, “Yes, what do you want?” The answer is,
Bhakti as Ultimate Liberation 197

‘‘Please engage me in Your service.”’ This should be our prayer. We
should not say, “O energy of the Lord, O Krsna, please give me money.
Please give me a beautiful wife. Please give me many followers. Please
give me some prestigious position. Please give me the presidency.” These
are all material hankerings, which should be avoided. Lord Buddha advocated that we give up all material desires. It is not possible to become
desireless, but it is possible to give up material desires. It is the nature of
the living entity to desire; it is not possible to be desireless. If one is
desireless, he is dead. Desirelessness means purifying one’s desire, and
desire is purified when we only desire the service of Krsna.
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu teaches:

na dhanam na janam na sundarim
kavitam vd jagad-isa kimaye

mama janmani janmanisvare
bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi

‘‘O almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor do | desire
beautiful women, nor do I want any number of followers. I only want
Your causeless devotional service birth after birth.” (Siksdstaka 4) He
requests Lord Krsna’s service birth after birth. It is not that He is seeking salvation; rather, He simply wants to serve Krsna one life after
another. The devotees are not anxious to merge into the existence of the
Supreme. The Buddhist philosophy advocates nirvana, the negation of all
material desires. Buddha does not offer more than this. Sankaracarya
gives a little more, saying that we should become desireless in this material world and then enter into the Brahman effulgence. This is called
brahma-nirvana. According to the Vaisnava philosophy, however, we
should negate material desires and be situated on the Brahman platform,
but in addition we should engage in the devotional service of the Lord.
This is called bhakti. Mayavadi philosophers cannot understand this, but
Krsna says that this devotional service is on the transcendental platform.

The Sankhya philosophy of the atheist Kapila, which is a material philosophy, is simply the study of the twenty-four elements. However, the
real Sankhya philosophy, propounded by Kapiladeva, is transcendental to
the twenty-four elements and material activity. Thus in this Sankhya
philosophy, which is actually bhakti-yoga, there is no desire for material
198 Teachings of Lord Kapila

benefits. On the material platform, a person works for his own personal
sense gratification or for some expanded sense gratification. One may
work for himself, family, wife, children, society, community, nation or
humanity at large. This is simply expanded sense gratification. Whether
one steals for himself, family, community or whatever, the fact remains
that he is a thief. It is said that when Alexander the Great arrested a common thief, the thief told Alexander, ‘“What is the difference between us?
I am a small plunderer, and you are a great plunderer.’’ Being very sensible, Alexander released him, saying, “Yes, there is no difference.”
Regardless whether the sense gratification is for oneself, one’s family,
one’s nation or whatever, it is, after all, sense gratification. The quality
changes only when we work for the sense gratification of Krsna.

It is noteworthy that Bhagavad-gita or Srimad-Bhagavatam never
states that krsna uvdca (“Krsna says”) or kapiladeva uvdca (‘‘Kapiladeva says”). Rather, it states bhagavan uvdca (“the Supreme Personality of Godhead says’’). This means that the version is perfect. If
we receive knowledge from an ordinary man, there will be many defects.
An ordinary person is subject to illusion, and he also has the tendency to
cheat. Although an ordinary person may be a very advanced scholar, he
does not possess perfect knowledge. Perfection is something totally different from what we find in the material world. Perfection means that
there is no mistake, no illusion, no cheating, no imperfection. Therefore
it is stated bhagavdn uvdca, for Bhagavan is all-perfect. We should
therefore take knowledge from Bhagavan or from one who speaks according to the version of Bhagavan.

The Krsna consciousness movement is based on this principle. We are
not presenting anything that we ourselves could manufacture. Whatever
we manufacture is sure to be defective or deficient. What is the value of
my philosophy? What is the value of my thought? Generally, people say,
‘In my opinion,” thinking that “‘my opinion”’ really means something.
People do not think, °*I am simply a rascal.’’ People value their opinion,
thinking it something very big. Everyone in this material world has imperfect senses; therefore whatever knowledge has been gathered
through the senses is necessarily imperfect. As we have stressed over and
over, we have to receive knowledge from the disciplic succession. Knowledge has to be received from Bhagavan, the perfect one. If we simply
follow this system, we can become a guru for the whole world.
Bhakti as Ultimate Liberation 199

The devotee never thinks that he is a great bhakta. Krsnadasa
Kaviraja Gosvémi, the author of Caitanya-caritdmrta, has stated,
purisera kita haite mufi se laghistha: “I am lower than the worms in
stool.” (Adi 5.205) This is the Vaisnava conception. A Vaisnava is by
nature very humble. He never says, “‘l am the Supreme; I have become
God.”’ Krsna says, ““l am God. Worship Me.” The Vaisnava says, “Krsna
is God. Worship Krsna.”’ It is not difficult to become a guru, provided
that we repeat what Krsna says. Whatever Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita
is dharma. Dharma is one. It cannot be different. Dharma means abiding
by the orders of God. However, if we do not know God or His orders, we
can only set about manufacturing some rubbish and fighting among ourselves. This is not dharma but philosophical speculation. All of this
speculation and manufactured dharma has been kicked out of SrimadBhagavatam because it is all cheating. Bhdgavata-dharma is not cheating, for it is related to the Supreme Lord. Bhakti can be applied only to
Bhagavan, and if there is no Bhagavan, there is no bhakti. If Bhagavan is
zero, where is bhakti? Bhakti is the transaction between Bhagavan and
the bhakta. Bhagavan is there, and the bhaktas are there, and the bhaktas address Bhagavan, feed Bhagavan, chant Bhagavan’s names, invoke
people to hear about Bhagavan, publish books about Bhagavan and worship Bhagavan, and in this way they are constantly absorbed in
Bhagavan. This is the process of bhakti.

TEXT 33

Jarayaty adsu yd kosam
nigimmam analo yatha

TRANSLATION

Bhakti, devotional service, dissolves the subtle body of the living entity without separate effort, just as fire in the stomach
digests all that we eat.

PURPORT

Bhakti is in a far higher position than mukti because a person’s endeavor for liberation from the material encagement is automatically
 

200 Teachings of Lord Kapila

realized in devotional service. If the digestive power is sufficient, then
whatever we eat will be digested by the fire in the stomach. Similarly, a
devotee doesn’t have to try separately to attain liberation. That very service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the process of liberation
because to engage in the service of the Lord is to liberate oneself from
material entanglement.

For a devotee, liberation is no problem at all. Liberation takes place
without separate endeavor. Bhakti, therefore, is far better than mukti or
the impersonalist position. The impersonalists undergo severe penances
and austerities to attain mukti, but the bhakta, simply by engaging in the
bhakti process, especially in chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, immediately develops control over the tongue by chanting, and accepting the
remnants of foodstuff offered to the Personality of Godhead. As soon as
the tongue is controlled, all other senses are controlled automatically.
Sense control is the perfection of the yoga principle, and one’s liberation
begins immediately as soon as he engages in the service of the Lord. It is
confirmed by Kapiladeva that bhakti, or devotional service, is gariyasi,
more glorious than siddhi, liberation.

It is stated in this verse that bhakti dissolves the subtle body. The
spirit soul has two coverings—subtle and gross. The gross body is composed of earth, water, fire, air and ether. The subtle body is composed of
mind, intelligence and ego. Of the eight material elements, five are gross
and three are subtle. We cannot see the subtle, and the soul is even more
subtle. Anyone with eyes can see the body, but not everyone can perceive
the soul, the actual person. When we understand that the soul, or the
person, has left the body, we cry, “‘Oh, my friend has left.”” We can perceive that the body is there, but something is obviously missing. Thus
one’s friend is actually different from the body. At the present moment
when we say, “This is my friend,” we refer to the body, but that is
simply the vision of an animal. Animals think, “This is my dog friend,
and this is my mother dog.” They cannot see beyond the gross body.
Similarly, we cannot see the soul, and if we cannot see the minute soul,
how can we hope to see God with these blunt eyes? We cannot actually
see one another. How, then, can we hope to see God? It is stated: atah Srikrsna-ndmddi na bhaved grahyam indriyaih. “Material senses cannot
appreciate Krsna’s holy name, form, qualities and pastimes.”
Bhakti as Ultimate Liberation 201

Our present senses are incapable of seeing God. Generally, at death we
can understand that something has gone. We understand that what we
were seeing was not actually our friend but a lump of matter. This is
knowledge. However, one who understands before death that the body is
simply a lump of matter is called a wise man. He sees the soul through
the eyes of knowledge. Those who are on the gross platform, who are like
animals, can see neither the soul nor Bhagavan. The karmis, the gross
fruitive workers, do not understand the distinction between the body and
the soul. Out of many millions of karmis, there may be one jfidni, one
wise man who can understand. The jfdni knows that he is not the body,
and out of many millions of jfidnis, one may be actually liberated. The
Mayavadis think that because they are spirit soul, they are one with the
Supreme. Being equal in quality does not mean that one is the Supreme
Soul. Because the Maydvadis think that they have become one with
Narayana, they address one another as Narayana. They say, “You are
Narayana, I am Narayana, everyone is Narayana.” From this misconception, the idea of daridra-ndrdyana (poor Narayana) arises. The devotees
fully engaged in the service of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord do not
think in this way. They think, “If I am one with the Supreme, how is it I
have fallen into this condition?” They know that a drop of seawater is
one in quality with the vast ocean, but they also know that a drop of
water is never equal to the ocean itself.

Sometimes the Mayavadis worship Lord Visnu, but they do not actually believe in the form of Lord Visnu. They consider His image to be
some imaginary form to utilize as a means for self-realization. Mayavadis
say that the Absolute Truth has no riipa, no form, but it is stated:
isvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-dnanda-vigrahah. “Krsna, who is
known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal, blissful,
spiritual body.”

The word vigraha refers to the supreme form, but the Mayavadis do
not understand this. There are also many so-called Vaisnavas who worship Lord Visnu with an aim of becoming one with the Supreme. They
sometimes give the example of a drop of water merging into the great
ocean itself. This is simply nonsense. The ocean is a combination of
countless molecules of water, and it is impossible for one molecule to
merge into the totality. The sunshine is a combination of countless
trillions of small shining particles, and each particle has its individual
202 Teachings of Lord Kapila

identity as an atom. Because we do not have the eyes to see the small
atomic divisions, we think that they are one, but actually they are not
homogeneous. Similarly, although we are very small particles of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, we all have different identities. In

Bhagavad-gita (2.12) Sri Krsna says:

na tv evdham jdtu ndsam
na tvam neme janddhipah

na caiva na bhavisyamah
sarve vayam atah param

“Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these
kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.”

Krsna never says that He, Arjuna, and all the soldiers shall eventually
become one. Rather, He says that everyone will retain his own
individuality.

Those who have complete knowledge never think that in the future
they will become one with the Supreme. They simply want to remain in
their constitutional position as part and parcel of Krsna. Although we are
now covered by the material body, the material body can be easily dissolved by the process of bhakti-yoga. If we are strong in bhakti-yoga, we
actually no longer have a material body but a spiritual one. We are free.

When we are bafHed, we want to become the husband of goddess
Laksmi. The husband of goddess Laksmi is Narayana, God Himself. In
this material world, we are hankering after Laksmi, the goddess of fortune, but we are frustrated in our attempts. We think, “Now let me become the husband of Laksmi.” Actually, no one can enjoy Laksmi but
Narayana. Even exalted demigods like Lord Brahma and Lord Siva are
inferior to Lord Narayana, but we are so foolish that we are thinking of
assuming Ndardayana’s position, or making Narayana into daridranadrdyana, the poor man in the street. The Sdstras never equalize
Narayana with anyone, not even Lord Brahma or Lord Siva, what to
speak of foolish rascals.

One may ask why Narayana has created us, why it is we are part and
parcel of Narayana. Eko bahu-syam. Why has Naraéyana become many?
He has created us for enjoyment. Anandamayo "bhydsdt. He has created
us in the same way a gentleman accepts a wife. If one takes on a wife, he
Bhakti as Ultimate Liberation 203

will beget children. A man takes on the responsibility of maintaining a
wife and children because he thinks that through them he will enjoy life.
In the material world we see that during the evening a man tries to enjoy
life with his wife, children and friends. Therefore he takes on so many
responsibilities. This is supposed to be dnanda, bliss, but because it takes
place in the material world, the dnanda is converted into something distasteful. However, we can enjoy this dnanda when we are with our
Supreme Father, Krsna. We are all children of the Supreme Father, and
in Bhagavad-gita (14.4) Krsna claims all species of life as His children:

sarva-yonisu kaunteya
mirtayah sambhavanti yah
tasam brahma mahad yonir

aham bija-pradah pita

“It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kunti, are made
possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-giving
father.”’

The Supreme Father, Sri Krsna, has created us for His enjoyment, not
to create distress. Although we are Krsna’s children, we have given up
our Supreme Father because we wish to enjoy ourselves independently.
Consequently we are suffering. If a rich man’s son gives up his home to
try to enjoy life independently, he simply suffers. It is to our benefit to
return home, back to Godhead, to enjoy ourselves with our original
father, Krsna. This will give us happiness. Krsna is full of all opulence.
He possesses in totality wealth, strength, beauty, fame, knowledge and
renunciation. He possesses everything in unlimited quantity. If we
return to our original father, we can enjoy ourselves with Him unlimitedly. It is not that we can enjoy ourselves independent of Krsna. Nor
can we say that to enjoy ourselves we have to become one with Krsna. In
the material world, our father gives us our birth, and we are an entity
separate from him. If we are suffering, do we say, ““My dear father, I am
suffering. Will you please once again make me one with you?”’ Is this a
very good proposal? A father says, ““I have begotten you separately to enjoy yourself. You remain separate, and | remain separate, and in this way
we will enjoy. Now you are asking to become one with me. What is this
nonsense?”

 
204. Teachings of Lord Kapila

The Mayavadis want to become one with the Supreme because they are
suffering in the material world. Krsna has created us to enjoy ourselves
in His company, but due to our desire for independent enjoyment, we are
not doing that. Consequently we are suffering in this material world, and
because we are suffering we are thinking of becoming one with our
father. It is mdéyd’s business to try to build up the living entity, to puff
him up, and mayd’s last snare is to make the living entity think that he
can become one with God. Mayavadis think that becoming one with the
Supreme is the highest perfection, but this is not perfection because our
original constitutional position is to enjoy the company of Krsna. Friends
sit together in a room and enjoy one another’s company. What enjoyment
can one have by himself? Variety is the mother of enjoyment, and real
enjoyment is being in Krsna’s company. Therefore devotees never desire
to become one with the Supreme. It is Caitanya Mahaprabhu who says:

mama janmani janmanisvare

bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi

‘My dear Lord, I do not want to put an end to the process of birth and
death. | am not anxious for mukti. Let Me go ahead and take one birth
after another. It doesn’t matter. Simply let Me engage in Your service
birth after birth.” (Siksdstaka 4) This is real Gnanda. Unless we are
fully qualified devotees, we cannot enter into the Vaikuntha planets. We
have to live outside in the brahmayjyoti. If we desire this, Krsna will give
us the opportunity. After all, Krsna is everything. He is brahmajyoti and
Paramatma also. If we want to become one with the Supreme, we will be
allowed to live outside the Vaikuntha planets, in the brahmayjyoti.
However, that position is not eternal. As we have explained before, we
cannot live eternally in the brahmajyoti because we want variety. Without variety, there is no enjoyment.

In all conditions, the pure devotee is liberated. He may engage in some
occupation or business, but he is always thinking of how to serve Krsna,
and in this way he is automatically liberated. It is not that he thinks of
becoming one with the Supreme and attaining liberation. Rather, his
liberation lies in his personal relationship with the Supreme Lord

Himself.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Meditation on the Lord’s
Transcendental Forms

TEXT 34

naikdtmatam me sprhayanti kecin
mat-pdda-sevabhirata mad-ihah
ye ‘nyonyato bhdgavatah prasajya

sabhadjayante mama paurusani

TRANSLATION

A pure devotee who is attached to the activities of devotional
service and who always engages in the service of My lotus feet
never desires to become one with Me. Such a devotee, who is
unflinchingly engaged, always glorifies My pastimes and activities.

PURPORT

There are five kinds of liberation stated in the scriptures. One is to
become one with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, or to forsake
one’s individuality and merge into the Supreme Spirit. This is called
ekatmatam. A devotee never accepts this kind of liberation. The other
four liberations are: to be promoted to the same planet as God
(Vaikuntha), to associate personally with the Supreme Lord, to achieve
the same opulence as the Lord and to attain His same bodily features. A
pure devotee, as Kapila Muni will explain, does not aspire for any of the
five liberations. He especially despises the attempt to become one with
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sri Prabodhananda Sarasvati, a
preat devotee of Lord Caitanya, said, kaivalyam narakdyate: ““The happiness of becoming one with the Supreme Lord, which is the aspiration of
the Mayavadis, is considered hellish.” That oneness is not for pure
devotees.

205
206 Teachings of Lord Kapila

There are many so-called devotees who think that in the conditioned
state we may worship the Personality of Godhead but that ultimately
there is no personality; they say that since the Absolute Truth is impersonal, one can imagine a personal form of the impersonal Absolute Truth
for the time being, but as soon as one becomes liberated, the worship
stops. That is the theory put forward by Mayavada philosophy. Actually
the impersonalists do not merge into the existence of the Supreme Person
but into His personal bodily luster, which is called brahmayjyoti.
Although that brahmajyoti is not different from His personal body, that
sort of oneness (merging into the bodily luster of the Personality of
Godhead) is not accepted by a pure devotee because the devotees engage
in greater pleasure than merging into His existence. The greatest
pleasure is to serve the Lord. Devotees are always thinking about how to
serve Him; they are always designing ways and means to serve the
Supreme Lord, even in the midst of the greatest material obstacles.

Mayavadis accept the description of the pastimes of the Lord as myths,
but actually they are not; they are historical facts. Pure devotees accept
the narrations of the pastimes of the Lord as Absolute Truth. The words
mama paurusdni (My glorious activities) are significant. Devotees are
very much attached to glorifying the activities of the Lord, whereas
Mayavadis cannot even think of these activities. According to them, the
Absolute Truth is impersonal, but without personal existence, how can
there be activity? Because impersonalists take the activities mentioned in
the Srimad-Bhdgavatam, Bhagavad-gita and other Vedic literatures as
fictitious stories, they interpret them most mischievously. They have no
idea of the Personality of Godhead. They unnecessarily poke their noses
into the scripture and interpret it in a deceptive way in order to mislead
the innocent public. The activities of Mayavada philosophy are very
dangerous to the public, and therefore Lord Caitanya warned His disciples never to hear from any Mayavadi about any scripture. Mayavadis
will spoil the entire process, and the person hearing them will never be
able to come to the path of devotional service to attain the highest perfection. He only may be able to do so after a very long time.

It is clearly stated by Kapila Muni that bhakti activities are transcendental ta mukti. This is called paficama-purusdrtha. Generally, people
engage in the activities of religion, economic development and sense
pratification, and ultimately they work with an idea that they are going to
Meditation on the Lord’s Transcendental Forms 207

become one with the Supreme Lord (mukti). But bhakti is transcendental
to all these activities. The Srimad- -Bhagavatam, therefore, begins by
stating that all kinds of pretentious religiosity is completely eradicated
from the Bhdgavatam. Ritualistic activities for economic development
and sense gratification and, after frustration in sense gratification, the
desire to become one with the Supreme Lord, are all completely rejected
in the Bhdgavatam. The Bhdgavatam is especially meant for the pure
devotees, who always engage in Krsna consciousness, in the activities of
the Lord, and always glorify these transcendental activities. Pure devotees worship the transcendental activities of the Lord in Vrndavana,
Dvaraka and Mathura as they are narrated in the Srimad-Bhaégavatam
and other Purdnas. The Mayavadi philosophers completely reject them as
myths, but actually they are great and worshipable subjects and thus are
relishable only for devotees. That is the difference between a Mayavadi
and a pure devotee as they view scripture.

Actually Vedic scripture is krsna-kathd, topics about Krsna, and
krsna-katha is not a subject matter for a debate club. It is meant for the
devotees. Nondevotees simply waste their time reading Bhagavad-gitda
and Srimad-Bhaégavatam, and we have often mentioned that so-called
scholars, politicians and philosophers simply give misleading commentaries when they try to interpret Bhagavad-gita. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura used to say that they are like people trying to lick at a
bottle of honey that is sealed closed. If one does not know how to taste
honey, one begins licking at the bottle, but for one to actually taste the
honey, the bottle must be opened, and the key to its opening is the
devotee. Therefore it is said:

satam prasarigadn mama virya-samvido
bhavanti hrt-karna-rasdyanah kathaéh

taj-josandd dsv apavarga-vartmani
sraddha ratir bhaktir anukramisyati

“In the association of pure devotees, discussion of the pastimes and activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is very pleasing and
satisfying to the ear and the heart. By cultivating such knowledge one
gradually becomes advanced on the path of liberation, and thereafter he
208 Teachings of Lord Kapila

is freed, and his attraction becomes fixed. Then real devotion and
devotional service begin.”’ (Bhag. 3.25.25)

God is eternal, and His instructions and followers are also eternal. In
Bhagavad-gita (4.1) Krsna tells Arjuna that millions of years ago He
spoke Bhagavad-gita to the sun-god. Bhagavad-gitéd was spoken to
Arjuna five thousand years ago, and if we read it today we will still find
that it is fresh. Bhagavad-gitd and Krsna are never old. Although Krsna
is the most ancient one, the oldest of all, He always remains like a young
boy in His teens. He never appears older than twenty. Krsna’s words are
absolute, as well as His form, qualities and activities. They are always
fresh and new. If they were not, how could the devotees glorify them day
after day with greater enthusiasm? The more one glorifies Krsna, the
more enthusiastic one becomes in glorifying, glorifying, glorifying. This
is the meaning of spiritual. In the material world, if we repeat something
once, twice, thrice or four times, it finally becomes hackneyed and disgusting. However, this Hare Krsna mahd-manira can be chanted twentyfour hours daily, and one will still feel fresh and enthusiastic. It is not a
material sound like the sounds we hear on the radio. It is a spiritual
sound that comes from the spiritual world. Even in the material world we
can release a sound from one place, and it can be heard thousands of
miles away. A spiritual sound can be released from many trillions of
miles away, and it can be heard, provided that one has the machine to
capture it. That machine is bhagavat-premd. Those who have developed
love of Godhead can hear it.

Arjuna was neither a Vedantist nor a sannydsi, nor was he particularly
advanced in spiritual understanding. However, he heard Bhagavad-gitd
because he was a bhakta. Atheistic scholars and politicians cannot understand the transcendental vibration. They can only lick at the honey
bottle. Fools and rascals eat and drink everything without restriction,
thinking that they are doing so in the name of religion. There are many
so-called sudmis and yogis who tell their disciples that they can do anything and still advance spiritually, but this is not possible. One has to become a pure brdhmana, control the mind and senses and discuss the
Supreme Personality of Godhead among sddhus. This may sound very
difficult, but one can become a sat, a saintly person, within a second. If
one is eager, one can immediately surrender to Krsna.

When one approaches Krsna, one should say, ““My dear Krsna, | have
Meditation on the Lord’s Transcendental Forms 209

forgotten You. Now | am fully surrendered unto You. You may kill me as
You like or, if You like, You can give me protection.’’ When Prahlada was
asked by the Supreme Lord what benediction he desired, Prahlada
Maharaja replied, ““My dear Lord, why should I ask for some benediction
simply because I have suffered for You? You are supremely powerful,
and whatever I get, I get from You. I was born into a family of demons
and was inclined toward material enjoyment. I have seen my powerful
father, who was feared even by the demigods, annihilated within a second. Why should I ask for anything? Please engage me in the service of
Your servant. This is all I want. I do not want anything else.” In this way
a devotee never asks for anything material from the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. The devotees are simply satished in glorifying the Lord.
This is the way of bhakti-yoga.

Krsna descends to please His devotees and destroy the demons. From
the very beginning of Krsna’s birth, demons were present. Karnsa advised his constables, ‘“‘As soon as Krsna is born, tell me. I shall immediately kill Him.” He was always thinking of Krsna in this way,
negatively. Similarly, we will find so many so-called religionists whose
only purpose is to kill Krsna. Somehow or other they try to take Krsna
out of Bhagavad-gitd. They will comment on Bhagavad-gitd, but in their
commentaries there will never be mention of Krsna. They will never say
that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and that He should be
worshiped. This means that they are asuras, demons, although they may
present themselves as big scholars. Somehow or other they try to evade
krsna-bhakti, and their entire propaganda is aimed toward this.

TEXT 35

paSyanti te me rucirany amba santah
prasanna-vaktraéruna-locanani
ripdni divyani vara-pradani
sdkam vdcam sprhaniyam vadanti

TRANSLATION

O My mother, My devotees always see the smiling face of My
form, with eyes like the rising morning sun. They like to see My
210 Teachings of Lord Kapila

various transcendental forms, which are all benevolent, and they

also talk favorably with Me.

PURPORT

Mayavadis and atheists accept the forms of the Deities in the temple of
the Lord as idols, but devotees do not worship idols. They directly worship the Personality of Godhead in His arcd incarnation. Arcd refers to
the form we can worship in our present condition. Actually in our present state it is not possible to see God in His spiritual form because our
material eyes and senses cannot conceive of a spiritual form. We cannot
even see the spiritual form of the individual soul. When a man dies we
cannot see how the spiritual form leaves the body. That is the defect of
our material senses. In order to be seen by our material senses, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead accepts a favorable form which is called
arca-vigraha. This arcd-vigraha, sometimes called the arcd incarnation,
is not different from Him. Just as the Supreme Personality of Godhead
accepts various incarnations, He takes on forms made out of matter—
clay, wood, metal, jewels, etc.

There are many Sastric injunctions which give instructions for carving
forms of the Lord. These forms are not material. If God is all-pervading,
He is also in the material elements. There is no doubt about it. But the
atheists think otherwise. Although they preach that everything is God,
when they go to the temple and see the form of the Lord, they deny that
He is God. According to their own theory, everything is God. Then why
is the Deity not God? Actually, they have no conception of God. The
devotees’ vision, however, is different; their vision is smeared with love
of God. As soon as they see the Lord in His different forms, the devotees
become saturated with love, for they do not find any difference between
the Lord and His form in the temple, as do the atheists. The smiling face
of the Deity in the temple is beheld by the devotees as transcendental and
spiritual, and the decorations on the body of the Lord are very much appreciated by the devotees. It is the duty of the spiritual master to teach
his devotees how to decorate the Deity in the temple, how to cleanse the
temple and how to worship the Deity. There are different procedures,
rules and regulations followed in temples of Visnu, and devotees go there
and see the Deity, the vigraha, and spiritually enjoy the form, because all
of the Deities are benevolent. The devotees express their minds before
Meditation on the Lord’s Transcendental Forms 211

the Deity, and in many instances the Deity also gives answers. But one
must be a very elevated devotee in order to be able to speak with the
Supreme Lord. Sometimes the Lord informs the devotee through dreams.
These exchanges between the Deity and the devotee are not understandable by atheists, but actually the devotee enjoys them.

Clearly, those who have the eyes to see Krsna will see Him. When
Caitanya Mahaprabhu entered the temple of Jagannatha, He immediately
_ fainted upon seeing the Deity. He said, “Oh, here is My Lord! Here is My
Lord!” In order to see, one has to become santah, and one becomes santah by culture. When we develop love of Krsna, we will immediately see
Krsna and faint, saying, “Oh, here is my Lord!’’ However, those with no
faith, those who are always trying to deny Krsna, will simply say, “‘Oh,
this is an idol. This is simply a piece of stone.”

We must be eager to see Krsna and talk with Him. He is actually waiting to see whether we are interested in talking with Him. In Bhagavadgita (10.10) Sri Krsna says:

tesam satata-yuktanam
bhajatam priti-pirvakam
dadami buddhi-yogam tam

yena mam upayanti te

‘“To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give
the understanding by which they can come to Me.”

If we want to talk to some important man, we must have some
qualification. It is not that we can immediately talk to presidents or even
to senators just because we want to talk to them. Somehow or other we
must comply with certain rules and regulations. Krsna is ready to talk to
us, and for this purpose He has descended in the arcd-miirti, the Deity,
in order to be seen. We simply have to qualify ourselves to talk with
Him. The nondevotees, Mayavadis, who are interested in denying Krsna,
say that God has no eyes, no legs, no hands, no ears and so on. This is indirectly saying that God is blind and deaf and that He cannot do this or
that. In this way, they are indirectly insulting God. This is blasphemy.
God does not want to hear such nonsense. Therefore it is said in this
verse: sdkam vacam sprhaniyam vadanti. By saying that Krsna is blind,
that He has no eyes, no hands, no nothing, we are indirectly saying that
212 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Krsna does not exist. This is certainly not a favorable way to talk about
Krsna. If we want to talk about Krsna, we must consult the Vedic
literatures. Then we can understand how Krsna should be worshiped.

In Brahma-samhita (5.29) it is stated: ‘Sri Krsna is playing on His
flute, and His eyes are as beautiful as the petals of a lotus flower. He
wears a peacock feather in His hair, and His form is very beautiful.”’ The
Mayavadis say, “‘Just imagine some form of God.” But God’s form cannot
be imagined. God’s form is not imaginary but factual. This factual information we receive from the Vedas. When Krsna was present on this
earth, He exhibited His form and activities. All of these are divine, not
material. Krsna’s body is sac-cid-Gnanda-vigraha. It has nothing to do
with anything material. He descends as a favor to His devotees, who are
always anxious to see Him. His first business is to give pleasure to His
devotees, and His second business is to kill the demons, who are always
giving the devotees trouble. It is the nature of demons to give devotees
trouble, just as in the West, Lord Jesus Christ was crucified because he
was preaching God consciousness. Similarly, Hiranyakasipu tried to kill
his five-year-old boy Prahlada Maharaja because his son was talking
about Krsna. There were many demons who tried to kill Krsna Himself,
great demons like Piitand, Aghasura, Bakasura and Kamsa. Nonetheless,
Krsna destroys them all by His omnipotence.

Actually everyone in the material world is more or less an asura, an
atheist. If one preaches, one has to learn to tolerate the asuras and speak
in such a way that they can also become devotees. We should always
speak of Krsna in a pleasing way; then we will be benefited. Another
name for Krsna is Uttamasloka, which indicates that He is worshiped by
the best selected words. It is not that we should use any words we choose.
There are many prayers in the Vedic scriptures and also in the Bible and
Koran. Although the Christians and Muhammadans do not worship the
Deity, they offer prayers to the Lord, and that is also bhakti. Arcanam
vandanam.

There are nine different processes for worshiping the Lord, and one
may accept one or all of them. We should use very selected words and
surrender unto Krsna, but we should not say things which do not please
Him. We should not claim that God is formless and that He has no eyes,
no head or whatever. Actually it is stated in the Vedas that Krsna has no
hand but that He can accept our offering. This means that He has no maMeditation on the Lord’s Transcendental Forms 213

terial hand. If He actually has no hand, how can He extend His hand
millions of miles to accept an offering? Goloka Vrndavana is many
trillions and trillions of miles away, but Krsna can accept whatever we
offer. When the Vedas say that God has no hands, it is meant that He has
no material hands. His hands are sac-cid-dnanda-vigraha. If we can
understand Krsna’s activities, form, qualities and pastimes in this way,
we become fit to return home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 36

tair darsaniydvayavair udaravildsa-hdseksita-vama-siktaih

hrtatmano hrta-pranams ca bhaktir
anicchato me gatim anvim prayurkte

TRANSLATION

Upon seeing the charming forms of the Lord, smiling and attractive, and hearing His very pleasing words, the pure devotee
almost loses all other consciousness. His senses are freed from all
other engagements, and he becomes absorbed in devotional service. Thus in spite of his unwillingness, he attains liberation
without separate endeavor.

PURPORT

There are three divisions of devotees— first-class, second-class and
third-class. Even the third-class devotees are liberated souls. It is explained in this verse that although they do not have knowledge, simply
by seeing the beautiful decoration of the Deity in the temple, they are absorbed in thought of Him and lose all other consciousness. By fixing
oneself in Krsna consciousness, engaging the senses in the service of the
Lord, one is imperceptibly liberated. This is also confirmed in Bhagavadgita. Simply by discharging uncontaminated devotional service as
prescribed in the scriptures, one becomes equal to Brahman. In
Bhagavad-gita it is said, brahma-bhiydya kalpate. This means that the
living entity in his original state is Brahman because he is part and parcel
of the Supreme Brahman. Because of his forgetfulness of his real nature
as an eternal servitor of the Lord, he is overwhelmed and captured by
214 Teachings of Lord Kapila

maya. His forgetfulness of his real constitutional position is mdyd.
Otherwise he is eternally Brahman.

When one is trained to become conscious of his position, he understands that he is the servitor of the Lord. “Brahman” refers to a state of
self-realization. Even the third-class devotee—who is not advanced in
knowledge of the Absolute Truth but who offers obeisances with great
devotion, thinks of the Lord, sees the Lord in the temple and brings forth
flowers and fruits to offer to the Deity—becomes imperceptibly liberated. Sraddhayanvitah: with great devotion the devotees offer worshipful respects and paraphernalia to the Deity. The Deities of Radha and
Krsna, Laksmi and Narayana, and Rama and Sita, are very attractive to
devotees, so much so that when they see the Deity decorated in the
temple, they become fully absorbed in thinking of the Lord. That is
liberation. In other words, it is confirmed herein that even a third-class
devotee is in the transcendental position, above those who are striving
for liberation by speculation or other methods. Even great impersonalists
like Sukadeva Gosvami and the four Kumaras were attracted by the
beauty of the Deities in the temple, by the decorations and by the aroma
of tulasit offered to the Lord, and they became devotees. Even though
they were in the liberated state, instead of remaining impersonalists they
were attracted by the beauty of the Lord and became devotees.

Here the word vildsa is very important. Vildsa refers to the activities
or pastimes of the Lord. It is a prescribed duty in temple worship that not
_ only should one visit the temple to see the Deity nicely decorated, but at
the same time he should hear the recitation of Srimad-Bhagavatam,
Bhagavad-gité or some similar literature, which is regularly recited in
the temple. In Vrndavana, in every temple, there is recitation of the
Sdstras. Even third-class devotees who have no literary knowledge or no
time to read Srimad-Bhdgavatam or Bhagavad-gitd have the opportunity to hear about the pastimes of the Lord. In this way their minds
may remain always absorbed in the thought of the Lord—His form, His
activities and His transcendental nature. This state of Krsna consciousness is a liberated stage. Lord Caitanya, therefore, recommended five important processes in the discharge of devotional service: (1) to chant the
holy name of the Lord, Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare
Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, (2) to associate
with devotees and serve them as far as possible, (3) to hear Srimad
 
Meditation on the Lord’s Transcendental Forms 215

Bhagavatam, (4) to see the decorated temple and the Deity and, if possible, (5) to live in a place like Vrndavana or Mathura. These five items
alone can help a devotee achieve the highest perfectional stage. This is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita and in this verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
That third-class devotees can also imperceptibly achieve liberation is accepted in all Vedic literatures.

As far as meditation on the arcd-vigraha form of the Lord is concerned, we have to look at the Deity beginning with His lotus feet. It is
not that we immediately look at His smiling face. We should first try to
see the lotus feet of Krsna, and when we are practiced in this way, we can
look at His thighs, His waist and His chest. Then we can reach His smiling face. In this manner we should meditate on Krsna’s form, and thus
we can associate with Krsna by meditating on His smiling face, His flute,
His hands, His dress, His consort Srimati Radharani and the other gopis
surrounding Him. Thus we should practice observing the Supreme Lord,
and to this end He has appeared before us as the arcd-vigraha.

There are three kinds of devotee: kanistha-adhikari, madhyamaadhikari and uttama-adhikari. The uttama-adhikari is the most advanced; the madhyama-adhikari is in the middle stage; and the
kanistha-adhikari is the neophyte. It is recommended that the neophyte
meditate on the Deity daily. He should begin by meditating on the lotus
feet, and then when he is practiced, he should turn his gaze toward
Krgna’s smiling face. The neophyte should also read and hear Bhagavadgita and Srimad-Bhagavatam. If we simply try to see and don’t listen,
the results will not be permanent. In some temples there are Deities but
no discussion about Krsna. People attend for some time, but after a
while they lose interest. Thus there must be two activities. The Deities
must be worshiped, and this is called pdfcaratriki-vidhi. There must
also be bhagavata-vidhi, reading Srimad Bhagavad-gitaé and SrimadBhagavatam. Pajicaratriki-vidhi and bhdgavata-vidhi go hand in hand.
By participating in these two processes, the neophyte can gradually attain
the intermediate stage.

The spiritual master is supposed to be in the most advanced stage, but
for preaching purposes he descends to the intermediate stage. The
uttama-adhikari, the most advanced devotee, does not discriminate between devotees and nondevotees. He sees everyone but himself as a devotee. The truly advanced devotee sees that he is not a devotee but that
216 Teachings of Lord Kapila

everyone else is a devotee. The kanistha-adhikdri, the neophyte, simply
concentrates on the Deity, and that is required in the beginning:

arcayam eva haraye

pujam yah sraddhayehate
na tad-bhaktesu canyesu

sa bhaktah prakrtah smrtah

‘‘A person who is very faithfully engaged in the worship of the Deity in
the temple, but who does not know how to behave toward devotees or
people in general is called a prakrta-bhakta, or kanistha-adhikari.”
(Bhag. 11.2.47) According to the prescribed duties mentioned in the
scriptures, one must care for the Deity, but when one is a little further
advanced, he considers his functions with others. When one attains the
madhyama-adhikdri stage, his vision is described thus:

isvare tad-adhinesu

balisesu dvisatsu ca
prema-maitri-krpopeksa

yah karoti sa madhyamah

“The madhyama-adhikari is a devotee who worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the highest object of love, makes friends with the
Lord’s devotees, is merciful to the ignorant and avoids those who are
envious by nature.” (Bhag. 11.2.46)

The madhyama-adhikdri is not only interested in the Deity, but he
can also discern between devotees and nondevotees. He can also understand that this man is innocent and that this man is not. The innocent do
not know what is to be done, and they do not know anything about God.
They are not actually offenders, but there are others who are offenders.
The offenders become immediately envious as soon as they hear about
God or His devotees.

The madhyama-adhikari knows that Krsna is God: krsnas tu
bhagavan svayam. He wants to develop his love for Krsna. He also wants
to see that not a moment is wasted without engagement in Krsna consciousness. He is always careful not to spoil life’s valuable time. That is
the first qualification of a madhyama-adhikdri. We have a very short
Meditation on the Lord’s Transcendental Forms 217

period to live, and we never know when we are going to die. There is no
certainty. Foolish people think that they will go on living forever, but
that is simply foolishness. Life is transient; therefore the devotee wants
to utilize every moment for the advancement of Krsna consciousness.

The madhyama-adhikdari also has a special taste for chanting the Hare
Krsna mantra. He is also very anxious to live in places like Vrndavana,
Dvaraka and Mathura, places where Krsna lived. Of course it is a fact
that Krsna, being God, has His residence everywhere. He even resides
within every atom. Anddntara-stha-paramdnu-caydantara-stham. Nonetheless, He has special places of residence like Vrndavana, Dvaraka
and Mathura; therefore a devotee is anxious to live in those places.

Increasing one’s love for God is a gradual process, and the first ingredient is faith. Without faith, there is no question of progress in Krsna
consciousness. That faith is created after reading Bhagavad-gita
carefully and actually understanding it as it is. Unless one reads
Bhagavad-gitd, there is no question of faith in Krsna. One must have
faith in the words of Krsna, particularly when Krsna says, “Abandon all
dharmas and surrender to Me. I will give you all protection.” If we study
Bhagavad-gita as a literary treatise and then throw it away, that is not
faith. Faith is explained by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami thus:

‘sraddha’-sabde —visvdsa kahe sudrdha niscaya
krsne bhakti kaile sarva-karma krta haya

‘“By rendering transcendental loving service to Krsna, one automatically
performs all subsidiary activities. This confident, firm faith, favorable
to the discharge of devotional service, is called sraddha.” (Cc.
Madhya 22.62)

In Bhagavad-gita Krsna says that He is not only a person but the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as well. He also says that there is no one
superior to Him. If one believes these words, then one will have faith.
Impersonalists read Bhagavad-gita, but they do not accept Krsna as a
person. In the Twelfth Chapter of Bhagavad-gitd, Krsna says that the
impersonalist takes more trouble to come to Him. He will come later, but
it will take some time. This is because impersonal understanding of the
Supreme Absolute Truth is partial understanding. As Krsna states:
 

 

218 Teachings of Lord Kapila

kleso ’dhikataras tesaém
avyaktdsakta-cetasadm

avyakta hi gatir duhkham
dehavadbhir avapyate

‘For those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested, impersonal
feature of the Supreme, advancement is very troublesome. To make
progress in that discipline is always difficult for those who are embodied.” (Bg. 12.5)

We have often given the example of impersonal understanding being
like the understanding of the sunshine. One may see the sunshine entering through a window into his room, but this does not mean that one
knows everything about the sun. Impersonal understanding of the Absolute Truth is like that. The sunshine is impersonal (Brahman), the sun
itself is localized (Paramatméa) and the sun-god residing within the sun is
a person (Bhagavan). Just as one can understand the three aspects of the
sun—the sunshine, the sun itself and the sun-god—one can also understand the three aspects of the Supreme Absolute Truth— Brahman,
Paramatma and Bhagavan.

Impersonalists maintain that the sun is simply a fiery globe and
nothing else, but in Bhagavad-gita Krsna specifically states that He
spoke Bhagavad-gitd to the sun-god Vivasvan. Of course we can hardly
imagine how the sun-god can be a person. The sun is a great fiery globe,
and we think that it is impossible for anyone to live there, but this thinking is simply shortsighted. It does not follow that no one can live in fire
just because we cannot live there. We cannot live in water, yet there are
aquatics living there. We live on this planet, which is basically composed
of earth, and our bodies are basically composed of earth in order to live
here. Bodies are made in such a way that they can live in their environment. Similarly, the sun-god has a body capable of living in fire.

Krsna is sac-cid-Gnanda-vigraha, being, knowledge and bliss, with
form. Impersonal understanding is understanding of the sat feature.
Understanding Krsna in full is understanding all of His features. The
dnanda feature is realized in Bhagavan. Krsna plays on His flute and is
accompanied by His pleasure potency, hladini Sakti, Srimati Radharani.
Of Krsna’s many potencies, the hlddini Sakti is His pleasure-giving
potency. That is dnanda. Although Krsna is full in Himself, He expands
Meditation on the Lord’s Transcendental Forms 219

Himself when He wants to enjoy. That expansion is His pleasure potency,
Radharani. The gopis are the expansions of Radhardni, and the various
forms of Krsna are manifest just to taste the mellow of transcendental
bliss. Ananda-cinmaya-rasa. Thus Brahman realization is realization of
the sat portion, Paramatma realization is realization of the cit portion,
and Bhagavan realization is the realization of the dnanda portion. In the
Veddnta-sitra it is said that the Absolute Truth is dnandamayo
’bhydsat. Krsna’s lila is always full of transcendental bliss—especially in
Vrndavana, His original residence. It is in Vrndavana that Krsna plays
with His cowherd boy friends and dances with the gopis. It is also in
Vrndavana that Krsna steals mother Yasoda’s butter. All His activities
there are filled with transcendental bliss.

We can begin to experience this bliss by following the prescribed
methods of devotional service. When we see the Deity, we can gradually
realize how Krsna is smiling, playing on His flute and enjoying the company of Srimati Radharani. Then we also have to hear about Krsna.
These two processes will increase in such a way that we will automatically
become great devotees. Anicchato me gatim anvim prayurkte. This is actually a scientific method. It is not imagination. People think that this is
idol worship and imagination, but this method is prescribed in all the
Sdstras for developing God consciousness. It is an actual science.

sri-bhagavan uvdca
jianam parama-guhyam me
yad vijfidna-samanvitam
sa-rahasyam tad-angam ca
grhdna gaditam maya

‘The Personality of Godhead said: Knowledge about Me as described in
the scriptures is very confidential, and it has to be realized in conjunction
with devotional service. The necessary paraphernalia for that process is
being explained by Me. You may take it up carefully.” (Bhdg. 2.9.31)
In Bhagavad-gitad Krsna tells Arjuna that He has revealed this most
confidential knowledge to him because Arjuna is His very dear friend.
That confidential knowledge is, sarva-dharmadn parityajya mam ekam
Saranam vraja: “‘Just surrender unto Me.” (Bg. 18.66) Brahman realization is certainly confidential, and Paramatma realization is still more
220 Teachings of Lord Kapila

confidential, but understanding Krsna as He is, is the most confidential
knowledge of all.

If one’s mind and senses are completely absorbed in Krsna consciousness, one is experiencing bhakti. Bhakti is not a sentiment but a practical
science. One may engage in many activities, but in all cases, one’s mind
must be fully absorbed in Krsna. Although a housewife is always busy
working around the house, she always takes care that her hair is nicely
combed. Regardless of her engagements, she never forgets to arrange her
hair in an attractive way. Similarly, a devotee engages in many activities,
but he never forgets Krsna’s transcendental form. This is the meaning of
perfection.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN

The Pure Devotees’ Spiritual Opulences

TEXT 37

atho vibhitim mama méyavinas tam
alsvaryam astarigam anupravrttam

sriyam bhdgavatim vasprhayanti bhadram
prasya me te ’snuvate tu loke

TRANSLATION

Thus because he is completely absorbed in meditation upon Me,
the devotee does not desire even the highest benediction obtainable in the upper planetary systems, including Satyaloka. He does
not desire the eight material perfections obtained from mystic
yoga, nor does he desire to be elevated to the kingdom of God. Yet
even without desiring them, the devotee enjoys, even in this life,
all the offered benedictions.

PURPORT

The vibhiti, or opulences, offered by m@ya are of many varieties. We
experience different varieties of material enjoyment even on this planet,
but if one is able to promote himself to higher planets like Candraloka,
the sun or, still higher, Maharloka, Janaloka and Tapoloka, or even
ultimately the highest planet, which is inhabited by Brahma and is called
Satyaloka, one will find immense possibilities for material enjoyment.
For example, the duration of life on higher planets is far, far greater
than on this planet. It is said that on the moon the duration of life is such
that our six months are equal to one day. We cannot even imagine the
duration of life on the highest planet. It is stated in Bhagavad-gitéa that
Brahma’s twelve hours are inconceivable even to our mathematicians.
These are all descriptions of the external energy of the Lord, or maya.

221
222 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Besides these, there are other opulences which the yogis can achieve by
their mystic power. They are also material. A devotee does not aspire for
all these material pleasures, although they are available to him simply by
wishing. By the grace of the Lord, a devotee can achieve wonderful material success simply by willing, but a real devotee does not do so. Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu has taught that one should not desire material
opulence or material reputation, nor should one try to enjoy material
beauty; he should only aspire to be absorbed in the devotional service of
the Lord, even if he does not get liberation but has to continue the process of birth and death unlimitedly. Actually, however, to one who
engages in Krsna consciousness, liberation is already guaranteed. Devotees enjoy all the benefits of the higher planets and the Vaikuntha planets also. It is especially mentioned here, bhdgavatirn bhadram. In the
Vaikuntha planets everything is eternally peaceful, yet a pure devotee
does not even aspire to be promoted there. But still he gets that advantage; he enjoys all the facilities of the material and spiritual worlds, even
during the present life span.

According to Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Ripa Gosvami in his Bhaktirasamyta-sindhu, Narada Muni in the Narada-pajicaratra and Bhagavan
Sri Krsna in Bhagavad-gita, a pure devotee never wants anything from
the Lord. He does not even want liberation, to say nothing of material
things. Generally, people want dharma, artha, kdma and moksa, in that
order. First of all, people want to become religious (dharma) in order to
attain material opulence (artha). People want material opulence in order
to gratify their senses (kama), and when they are frustrated in their attempt to gratify their senses, they want liberation (moksa). In this way,
dharma, artha, kéma and moksa are going on. However, a devotee is not
interested in any of these. In the Christian religion, people pray, “‘Give
us this day our daily bread,”’ but a pure bhakta does not even ask for his
daily bread. A pure devotee is kept in the hand of Krsna just like a very
precious jewel. When you hold something precious in your hand, you are
very careful, and similarly, Krsna holds the devotee and takes care of
him.

One can just imagine his position if a very rich man says, “Don’t
worry. I will take care of everything for you.”’ Krsna, the Supreme Lord,
is the proprietor of all opulence. There is no one more opulent than
The Pure Devotees’ Spiritual Opulences 223

Krsna; therefore if Krsna says that He will take care of His devotee,
there is no question of poverty. Most people want material opulence, but
they do not know that Krsna is the proprietor of all opulence. That is
their misfortune. Although the proprietor of all opulence says, “‘Just surrender unto Me, and I will take care of you,” people do not do it. Instead,
they say, “I will take care of my own business. I will maintain myself. I
will take care of myself, my family, my friends and my country.” Arjuna
was very intelligent because he simply chose Krsna, whereas
Duryodhana took Krsna’s soldiers. It is not possible to conquer Krsna,
but the devotee can capture Krsna with bhakti, love.

It is impossible for people to understand the great opulence of Sri
Krsna. Therefore Caitanya Mahaprabhu tells us to abandon speculating
about God. There is a story of a frog in a well being approached by a
friend who says, “My dear frog, I have just seen a huge body of water.”
“What is that water?”’ the frog asks. ““The Atlantic Ocean,”’ the friend
replies. “Oh, the Atlantic Ocean! Is it bigger than this well? Is it four
feet? Ten feet?”

Our attempt to speculate about God is very much like this. If we want
to understand God, we have to try to understand from God Himself. We
may have a neighbor who is very wealthy, influential, wise, strong and
beautiful, and we may speculate about his opulence, but if we make
friends with him, we can understand his position by listening to him
speak about himself. God cannot be subjected to our imagination. Our
imagination is limited, and our senses are imperfect. The process of
bhakti-marga is the process of submission. There is no question of subjecting God to our imagination. We simply have to become very humble
and submissive and pray to Krsna sincerely, “‘Krsna, it is not possible for
me to know You. Kindly explain how it is I can know You, and then it will
be possible.”’ This is the way Arjuna approached Krsna in the Eleventh
Chapter of Bhagavad-gita.

We can hardly understand or comprehend the innumerable universes.
The word jagat refers to this universe, but there is more than one universe. Although we are seeing only one universe, there are millions of
universes, and Krsna is supporting all these millions of universes with a
single fragment of Himself. This is also confirmed in many other Vedic
literatures:
224 Teachings of Lord Kapila

yasyaika-nisvasita-kdlam athavalambya
Jivanti loma-vilaja jagad-anda-nathah

visnur mahan sa iha yasya kald-viseso
govindam ddi-purusam tam aham bhajami

‘Brahma and other lords of the mundane worlds, appearing from the
pores of hair of Maha-Visnu, remain alive as long as the duration of His
one exhalation. I adore the primeval Lord Govinda, of whose subjective personality Maha-Visnu is the portion of a portion.” (Brahmasamhita 5.48)

This is the information given in Brahma-samhita, the prayers offered
by Lord Brahma. This Brahma-samhité was accepted by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who copied it when He toured South India. Formerly there
were no presses to print these literatures, and these important Vedic
writings were written by hand. These literatures were not very cheap,
and only highly qualified brahmanas were able to keep them. They were
worshiped in the temple as the sdstra Deity. It is not that they were
available everywhere. Now, of course, the printing press has changed all
this, but nonetheless we should always understand that the granthas, the
scriptures, should be worshiped as God because they are the sound incarnation of God. One should not consider Bhagavad-gita or SrimadBhaégavatam to be ordinary books, and one should take care of them just
as carefully as one takes care of the Deity.

At any rate, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned from South India with a copy of Brahma-samhita, He gave it to His disciples and told
them that it was a summary of the Vedanta and the SrimadBhagavatam. We therefore accept Brahma-sarnhita as authorized
scripture, for it was authorized by the Supreme Person, Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Just as Sri Krsna explains in Bhagavad-gitd in so many ways
that the entire material creation is resting on one of His portions,
Brahma-samhita explains the same subject. It is stated that from the
skin pores of the Maha-Visnu, all the universes are emanating. In each
universe there is a Brahma, a supervisor, who is the supreme creature
and manager. These managers live only as long as the Maha-Visnu exhales. When He exhales, all the universes are created, and when He inhales, they all return into His body. In this way so many universes and
Brahmas are coming and going. The durations of these breaths, which
The Pure Devotees’ Spiritual Opulences 225

constitute a life of a Brahma, are described in Bhagavad-gita as many
trillions of earth years. One may say that this is all fictitious and imaginary, but unless one believes it, one has no right to touch Bhagavad-gitd.

Generally people are interested in going to the higher planetary
systems in order to become more opulent. This is the process of karmakandiya, and people perform yajfias and pious activities in order to be
elevated to higher planets. The idea is that one will be able to enjoy himself more, have a longer life span, more opulence, more beautiful
women, nice gardens and so on. Actually this is the case, but a devotee is
not at all interested in these things because he accepts Krsna. In
Bhagavad-gita (8.16) Sri Krsna says, dbrahma-bhuvandl lokah punar
dvartino ’rjuna: *“*From the highest planet in the material world down to
the powest, all are places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take
place.”

Even if we are promoted to the highest planet, Brahmaloka, the planet
where Lord Brahmi lives, our situation there is still not eternal. So why
should a devotee be interested in such a place? A devotee is simply 1 interested in the supreme eternal, Sri Krsna. The Supreme Lord is the
supreme leader of the nityas, the eternal living entities. We are all
nityas, eternal, and Krsna guides and plays with us. In the spiritual
world, Krsna and His devotees are friends, and they play together as
cowherd boys. They are not interested in Brahmaloka or Candraloka, for
these planets will ultimately be annihilated. There are some living entities that live only a few seconds, or, at most, a night. By the morning,
they are all dead. Any life in the material world is comparable to that.
Brahma may live millions of years, but he ultimately has to die. Whether
we go to the highest planet or the lowest planet, whether we are in the
body of a Brahma or a cat, we ultimately have to die. Krsna presents
Himself to atheists as death. He appeared in this way before
Hiranyakasipu, who said, “‘I am God. All the demigods are afraid of me. I
am very powerful.’’ Krsna comes before such atheists as death and takes
everything away —all power, opulence, money —everything. The theists
worship God while they are living, and their only business in this life is
serving God. After death, they render the same service; thus there is no
difference between Vaikuntha and a temple, for a devotee. In either case,
his business is the same. Why, then, should he aspire to go to
Vaikuntha?
226 Teachings of Lord Kapila

In the Vaikuntha planets one attains opulence like Krsna or Narayana.
There are five kinds of mukti, liberation, and one is sdrsti. This kind of
liberation brings one opulence equal to the Lord. In the Vaikuntha planets, everyone is four-handed like Narayana, and everyone is equally opulent. In Goloka Vrndavana, Krsna and the cowherd boys are equally
opulent. In Vrndavana, the cowherd boys do not know that Krsna is God.
They look on Krsna as an equal. This is the opulence of their devotional
position.

Nonetheless, the devotees do not aspire for all this opulence. Their
only aspiration is to engage in the service of the Lord. In this way, they
get everything. Nor are the devotees interested in attaining the mystic
yoga siddhis. They do not need to be able to create a planet, for they can
create Vaikuntha by worshiping Krsna in the temple. The temple is
nirguna, transcendental to the gunas. In the Sdstras it is said that the
forest is characterized by sattva-guna, goodness, and the city is characterized by rajo-guna, passion, because in the city there is a great deal of
illicit sex, intoxication, gambling and meat-eating. Formerly, when
people were aspiring for spiritual realization, they left the cities and went
to the forests. That was the vdnaprastha stage. The word vana means
““forest.”” Before taking sannydsa, a man would leave his family and go
to the forest to begin practicing austerities. Vanam gato yad dharim
asrayeta. |

Actually, superior to living in the forest is living in the temple because
the temple is nirguna, above all the gunas, even sattva-guna. The inhabitants of the temple are actually in Vaikuntha.

Lord Kapiladeva next explains the nature of the special opulences of
the devotees.

TEXT 38

na karhicin mat-pardah sdnta-riipe
narksyanti no me ‘nimiso ledhi hetih

yesdm aham priya atma sutas ca
sakha guruh suhrdo daivam istam

TRANSLATION

The Lord continued: My dear mother, devotees who receive
such transcendental opulences are never bereft of them; neither
The Pure Devotees’ Spiritual Opulences 227

weapons nor the change of time can destroy such opulences. Because the devotees accept Me as their friend, relative, son, preceptor, benefactor and Supreme Deity, they cannot be deprived of
their possessions at any time.

PURPORT

It is stated in Bhagavad-gitd that one may elevate himself to the
higher planetary systems, even up to Brahmaloka, by dint of pious activities, but when the effects of such pious activities are finished, one
again comes back to this earth to begin a new life of activities. Thus even
though one is promoted to the higher planetary system for enjoyment
and a long duration of life, still that is not a permanent settlement. But as
far as the devotees are concerned, their assets—the achievement of devotional service and the consequent opulence of Vaikuntha, even on this
planet—are never destroyed. In this verse Kapiladeva addresses His
mother as sdnta-ripa, indicating that the opulences of devotees are fixed
because devotees are eternally fixed in the Vaikuntha atmosphere, which
is called Sdnta-ripa because it is in the mode of pure goodness, undisturbed by the modes of passion and ignorance. Once one is fixed in the
devotional service of the Lord, his position of transcendental service cannot be destroyed, and the pleasure and service simply increase unlimitedly. For the devotees engaged in Krsna consciousness, in the
Vaikuntha atmosphere, there is no influence of time. In the material
world the influence of time destroys everything, but in the Vaikuntha atmosphere there is no influence of time or of the demigods because there
are no demigods in the Vaikuntha planets. Here our activities are controlled by different demigods; even if we move our hand and leg, the action is controlled by the demigods. But in the Vaikuntha atmosphere
there is no influence of the demigods or of time; therefore there is no
question of destruction. When the time element is present, there is the
certainty of destruction, but when there is no time element—past, present or future—then everything is eternal. Therefore this verse uses the
words nariksyanti no, indicating that the transcendental opulences will
never be destroyed.

The reason for freedom from destruction is also described. The devotees accept the Supreme Lord as the most dear personality and reciprocate with Him in different relationships. They accept the Supreme
228 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Personality of Godhead as a dearmost friend, relative, son, preceptor,
well-wisher or Deity. The Lord is eternal; therefore any relationship in
which we accept Him is also eternal. It is clearly confirmed herein that
the relationships cannot be destroyed, and therefore the opulences of
those relationships are never destroyed. Every living entity has the propensity to love someone. We can see that if someone has no object of love,
he generally directs his love to a pet animal like a cat or a dog. Thus the
eternal propensity for love in all living entities is always searching for a
place to reside. From this verse we can learn that we can love the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as our dearmost object —as a friend, as
a son, as a preceptor or as a well-wisher—and there will be no cheating
and no end to such love. We shall eternally enjoy the relationship with
the Supreme Lord in different aspects. A special feature of this verse is
the acceptance of the Supreme Lord as the supreme preceptor.
Bhagavad-gita is spoken directly by the Supreme Lord, and Arjuna accepted Krsna as his guru, or spiritual master. Similarly, we should accept
only Krsna as the supreme spiritual master.

When we speak of Krsna, we include His confidential devotees; Krsna
is not alone. Krsna includes His name, His form, His qualities, His abode,
His associates, etc. For example, a king is always associated with his
secretary, his commander, his servant and so much paraphernalia. As
soon as we accept Krsna and His associates as our preceptors, no ill effects
can destroy our knowledge. In the material world the knowledge we acquire may change because of the influence of time, but nevertheless the
conclusions received from Bhagavad-gita, directly from the speeches of
the Supreme Lord Krsna, can never change. There is no use interpreting
Bhagavad-gitd; it is eternal.

Krsna, the Supreme Lord, should be accepted as one’s best friend. He
will never cheat. He will always give His friendly advice and protection
to the devotee. If Krsna is accepted as a son, He will never die. Here we
may have a very loving son or child, but the father and mother, or those
who are affectionate toward him, always hope, ‘““May my son not die.”’
But Krsna actually never will die. Therefore those who accept Krsna, or
the Supreme Lord, as their son will never be bereft of their son. In many
instances devotees have accepted the Deity as a son. In Bengal there are
many such instances, and even after the death of the devotee, the Deity
The Pure Devotees’ Spiritual Opulences 229

performs the srdddha ceremony for the father. The relationship is never
destroyed. People are accustomed to worship different forms of
demigods, but in Bhagavad-gitad such a mentality is condemned;
therefore one should be intelligent enough to worship only the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in His different forms such as Laksmi-Nardayana,
Siti-Rama and Radha-Krsna. Thus one will never be cheated. By
worshiping the demigods, one may elevate himself to the higher planets,
but during the dissolution of the material world, the deity and his abode
will be destroyed. But one who worships the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is promoted to the Vaikuntha planet, where there is no time,
destruction or annihilation. The conclusion is that time cannot act upon
devotees who have accepted the Supreme Personality of Godhead as
everything.

Spiritual life is eternal; it cannot be destroyed. Whatever we have here
in the material world is subject to destruction. In this material world we
aspire for a nice house, good property, children, friends and riches, but
ultimately all of these will be destroyed, including ourselves. Nothing
here is permanent; therefore everything is called illusory. Actually we
do not understand this; we take all this as permanent. The fact is,
however, that only Krsna is permanent. Krsna’s material energy is not
permanent.

Mayavadis think that in the spiritual world there are no relationships.
However, in the Sdstras it is stated that in the spiritual world there is real
life. Life in this material world is simply a shadow of that life. In the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gitd this material world is likened to a
banyan tree with its roots above and branches below. This means that it
is like a shadow. When we stand beside a reservoir of water, we see the
tree reflected upside down. We also have the experience of a mirage in
the material world. We think that there is water, but actually there is
none. Sometimes sailors at sea think they see land, but actually this is a
mirage in the water. This material world is like that. In our lives we
think we are enjoying some rasa, some relationship. Our children are
calling us father, and we are enjoying our relationship with our wife, but
all of these relationships are like shadows, although people have no information of this. The true enjoyment derived from these relationships
can be attained in the spiritual world with Krsna. Krsna therefore comes
230 Teachings of Lord Kapila

in person to teach us that we can enjoy the same relationship with Him.
We can enjoy Him as our master, our friend, our son, our father or our
lover.

The Mayavadi philosophers say that if Krsna has become everything,
there is no question of Krsna as an entity or a person. This is a materialistic idea. If we tear up a piece of paper into small pieces and throw
it away, the paper no longer has an existence. However, Krsna is not like
that.

advaitam acyutam anddim ananta-riipam
ddyam purdna-purusam nava-yauvanam ca

“I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who
is the original person—absolute, infallible, without beginning, although
expanded into unlimited forms, still the same original, the oldest, and
the person always appearing as a fresh youth.”’ (Brahma-samhita 5.33)
Krsna has many millions of expansions, and He is also situated in everyone’s heart. He is not only within human beings but within animals,
trees, plants, aquatics and so forth. It is materialistic to think that Krsna
has no individual existence if He has entered into so many millions of
hearts. Even though Krsna has distributed Himself in many millions of
parts, He is still present in the same strength. Krsna is sarvaisvaryapurna. He is never diminished.

There is an interesting story of a poor boy who was a student in school.
During an annual Father’s Day ceremony, the teacher requested the students to give some kind of a contribution. Formerly teachers would not
earn a salary but would receive whatever the students would bring from
their parents’ homes or by begging. Generally the brahmanas were
teachers, and they could not charge anything. Thus some students
brought the teacher rice, and some students brought other crops. This
one student was so poor that he could think of nothing to bring;
therefore he told his teacher that he would speak to his mother first.
After school, the student told his mother, “‘My dear mother, all my classmates have promised to contribute something to the teacher. What shall I
contribute?’’ The mother replied, ““My dear son, we are so poor that we
cannot give anything. However, Krsna is the friend of the poor. If He
The Pure Devotees’ Spiritual Opulences 231

gives you something, you can promise it to your teacher.” “Oh, where is
Krsna?” the little boy asked. “Well, I understand that He is in the
forest,” the mother said. Therefore the little boy went to the forest and
called for Krsna. He then began to cry, and finally Krsna came. When a
devotee is very eager to see Krsna, Krsna is so kind that He comes. “'So,
what are you asking?”’ Krsna said to the little boy. ““You are the friend of
the poor,” the little boy said. “I am very poor, and what can I promise
my teacher?’’ Krsna then told him, “You can tell him that you will supply him some yogurt, some dahi.”’ The little boy was very satisfied with
this, and the next day he went to his teacher and said, “I will supply you
as much yogurt as you need.” The teacher felt that this was very nice,
and he was pleased with the boy. On the day of the ceremony, the boy
again went to the forest and called for Krsna. Krsna appeared and gave
him a quart of yogurt. The little boy took this yogurt to his teacher and
said, “This is my contribution, sir.” The teacher looked at the quart and
said, “What is this? Hundreds of people will be coming, and you have
only given this much yogurt?’’ The teacher became so angry that he
spilled the yogurt out of the container. When he bent down to pick it up,
he saw that the container was again full. He dropped it again, and it was
again full. He could then understand that it was spiritual.

This is the nature of Krsna. One can take everything, and yet the same
will remain. In the material world, one minus one equals zero, but in the
spiritual world, one minus one equals one. That is called advaya-jfidna.
There is no duality in the spiritual world. One plus one equals one, and
one minus one equals one. If we love Krsna, that love will not be
destroyed as love is in the material world. In the material world, a servant serves the master as long as the servant is pleased and as long as the
master is pleased. The servant is pleased as long as the master pays, and
the master is pleased as long as the servant renders good service.
However, in the spiritual world, if the servant cannot serve under certain conditions, the master is still pleased. And if the master does not
pay, the servant is also pleased. That is called oneness, absolute. A guru
may have hundreds of disciples, hundreds of servants, but he doesn’t
have to pay them. They are serving out of spiritual love, and the guru is
teaching without receiving a salary. This is a spiritual relationship. There
are no cheaters and cheated in such a relationship. If we accept Krsna as
232 Teachings of Lord Kapila

our son, friend or lover, we will never be cheated. However, we have to
give up the false, illusory servant, son, father or lover, for they will
surely cheat us. We may love our son with our heart and soul, but that
very son may some day be our enemy. We may love our wife very much,
but some day that wife may be such an enemy that she will kill us for her
own interests. There are many instances of this in history. Mayavadi philosophers are afraid of having such relationships because they have bitter experience with these relationships in the material world. They
therefore want to negate all relationships, and therefore they say no more
son, daughter, lover, master or whatever. Being disgusted with these
things, they try to make everything void. Yet if we have the same relationship with Krsna, we will never be cheated or disappointed. Our enthusiasm will increase more and more. Therefore Krsna encourages us to
accept Him as our son, as our friend and as our master. Then we will be

happy.
TEXTS 39-40

imam lokam tathaivamum
dtmanam ubhaydyinam
dtmdnam anu ye ceha

ye rdyah pasavo grhah

visr]ya sarvdn anyamés ca
mam evam visvato-mukham
bhajanty ananyaya bhaktya

tan mrtyor atiparaye

TRANSLATION

Thus the devotee who worships Me, the all-pervading Lord of
the universe, with unflinching devotional service, gives up all
aspirations for promotion to heavenly planets or happiness in this
world with wealth, children, cows, home or anything in relationship with the body. I take him to the other side of birth and death.
The Pure Devotees’ Spiritual Opulences 233

PURPORT

Unflinching devotional service, as described in these two verses,
means engaging oneself in full Krsna consciousness, or devotional service, accepting the Supreme Lord as all in all. Since the Supreme Lord is
all-inclusive, if anyone worships Him with unflinching faith, one has
automatically achieved all other opulences and performed all other
duties. The Lord promises herein that He takes His devotee to the other
side of birth and death. Lord Caitanya, therefore, recommended that one
who aspires to go beyond birth and death should have no material possessions. [his means that one should not try to be happy in this world or to
be promoted to the heavenly world, nor should he strive for material
wealth, children, houses or cows.

How liberation is imperceptibly achieved by a pure devotee and what
the symptoms are have been explained. The situation with a conditioned
soul is different, however. If he is in the mode of goodness, he may be
preparing for promotion to the higher planets; if he is in the mode of
passion, he will remain here in a society where activity is very prominent, and if he is in the mode of ignorance, he may be degraded to
animal life or a lower grade of human life. But for a devotee there is no
concern for this life or the next life because in any life he does not desire
material elevation. He prays to the Lord, “‘My dear Lord, it does not matter where | am born, but let me be born, even as an ant, in the house of a
devotee.”” A pure devotee does not pray to the Lord for liberation from
this material bondage. Actually, the pure devotee never thinks that he is
fit for liberation. Considering his past life and his mischievous activities,
he thinks that he is fit to be sent to the lowest region of hell. If in this life
I am trying to become a devotee, this does not mean that in my many past
lives 1 was one hundred percent pious. That is not possible. A devotee,
therefore, is always conscious of his real position. Only by his full surrender to the Lord, by the Lord’s grace, are his sufferings mitigated. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita, “Surrender unto Me, and I will give you protection from all kinds of sinful reaction.”’ That is His mercy. But this does
not mean that one who has surrendered to the lotus feet of the Lord has
committed no misdeeds in his past life. A devotee always prays, ‘‘For my
misdeeds, may | be born again and again, but my only prayer is that I
may not forget Your service.”’ The devotee has such mental strength, and
234 Teachings of Lord Kapila

he prays to the Lord: “‘May I be born again and again, but let me be born
in the home of Your pure devotee so that | may again get a chance to
develop my spiritual life.”

A pure devotee is not anxious to elevate himself in his next birth. He
has already given up that sort of hope. In any life in which one is born, as
a householder, or even as an animal, he must have some children, some
resources or some possessions, but a devotee is not anxious to possess
anything. He is satished with whatever is obtainable by God’s grace. He
is not at all attached to improving his social status or the education of his
children. He is not neglectful—he is dutiful—but he does not spend too
much time on the improvement of temporary household or social life. He
fully engages in the service of the Lord, and for other affairs he simply
spares as much time as absolutely necessary (yathartham upayunjatah).
Such a pure devotee does not care what is going to happen in the next life
or in this life; he does not care even for family, children or society. He
fully engages in the service of the Lord in Krsna consciousness. It is
stated in Bhagavad-gitd that without the knowledge of the devotee, the
Lord arranges for His devotee to be immediately transferred to His transcendental abode just after leaving his body. After quitting his body he
does not go into the womb of another mother. The ordinary common living entity, after death, is transferred to the womb of another mother, according to his karma, or activities, to take another type of body. But as
far as the devotee is concerned, he is at once transferred to the spiritual
world in the association of the Lord. That is the Lord’s special mercy. Because He is all-powerful, the Lord can do anything and everything. He
can excuse all sinful reactions. He can immediately transfer a person to
Vaikunthaloka. That is the inconceivable power of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is favorably disposed to the pure devotees.

In these verses, Kapiladeva is describing the devotee’s acceptance of
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as the most dear to us. If we
want to love Krsna as a son, Krsna is prepared to be our son. Arjuna accepted Krsna as his friend, and Krsna was his best friend. Everyone can
accept Krsna in so many ways. We can love Krsna as Arjuna did, or as
mother Yasgodé did. Similarly, Pariksit Maharaja simply heard about
Krsna and developed love. The first-class yogi takes Krsna as everything— priya, suta, sakhd, guru, everything. This is real bhakti. If we
want a son, Krsna is prepared to be our son. If we want a lover, He is preThe Pure Devotees’ Spiritual Opulences 235

pared to be our lover. If we want a friend, He is prepared to be our
friend. Whatever relationship we want in the material world, we can
have with Krsna. We all have some loving propensity, and Krsna is prepared to fulfill this propensity. Krsna is not a person like ourselves. We
occupy one body, but Krsna is the owner of all bodies. The body is a
machine given by Krsna. In the material world, a father may give his son
a car. Similarly, Krsna gives the living entities bodies, 8,400,000 different types of bodies. The living entity gets into the body just as a person gets into a car, and he goes this way and that. We can drive this
machine called the body for so many years; then it becomes old, and we
have to change it for another machine. This is the process of birth and
death. We drive one car for a while, and the car is finally broken, or it is
smashed. We may have an accident or not, but eventually the car has to
go to the junk yard. Then we have to get another car.

Actually our position is that we never take birth and never die, but
why have we been put into this position of accepting these machines?
This is our real problem. What is the cause of this? We want to enjoy this
material world with its wealth and possessions. As long as we are after
material possessions, we cannot transcend the cycle of birth and death.
However, we have to give up all this and take shelter of Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and worship Him. Nor can we worship
Him whimsically, but as He desires. If Krsna says, “I want a glass of
water,” we must bring Him water. We cannot say, ““Milk is better than
water. | think I will bring Him milk.” This is not favorable service. Some
so-called bhaktas say, “I can worship the Lord in my own way.” This is
simply imagination. The Mayavadis say that Brahman has no ripa, no
form, and they suggest that we imagine some form. This is not the case
with Krsna. Krsna is present in His original form, and He is described in
Vedic literatures. We have recounted these descriptions before. If we
want to attain a body like Brahma’s, we can get it. If we want a body like
a worm in stool, we can get it. Or, if we want a body like Krsna’s, we can
get that also. That is our real body of sac-cid-dnanda. We can also get a
body like a demigod’s and go to the heavenly planets. Or we can remain
here in the middle planetary system. Our destination is our own choice.
We are given full freedom through our activities. By pious activities, we
go to the heavenly planets, and by Krsna conscious activities, we go to
Vaikunthaloka.
236 Teachings of Lord Kapila

We are part and parcel of Krsna, but somehow or other we have
forgotten this. In Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 20:117) it is said:

krsna bhuli’ sei jiva anddi-bahirmukha
ataeva maya tdre deya samsdra-duhkha

‘Forgetting Krsna, the living entity has been attracted by the external
feature from time immemorial. Therefore the illusory energy [maya]
gives him all kinds of misery in his material existence.’’ Because we have
forgotten Krsna, Krsna has given us all these Vedas and Purdnas. Krsna
also comes into this material world in order to remind us of Himself. In
this Kali-yuga, people are forgetting Krsna more and more. They are not
even interested in Him, but Krsna is interested because we are His sons.
A mad son may no longer be interested in his home, in his father or
mother, yet the father never loses interest in his son. He is anxious because his boy has left home and is suffering. Similarly, Krsna’s son
leaves the spiritual sky and takes up one material body after another and
in this way travels from one planet to another in different species of life.
Therefore Krsna comes to rescue him.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

Taking Shelter of Krsna,

the Supreme Controller

TEXT 41

nadnyatra mad-bhagavatah
pradhana-purusesvarat

dtmanah sarva-bhitanam
bhayam tivram nivartate

TRANSLATION

The terrible fear of birth and death can never be forsaken by
anyone who resorts to any shelter other than Myself, for I am the
almighty Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the original

source of all creation, and also the Supreme Soul of all souls.

PURPORT

It is indicated herein that the cycle of birth and death cannot be
stopped unless one is a pure devotee of the Supreme Lord. It is said,
harim vind naiva srtim taranti. One cannot surpass the cycle of birth and
death unless one is favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
same concept is confirmed herewith: one may take to the system of
understanding the Absolute Truth by one’s own imperfect sensory
speculation, or one may try to realize the self by the mystic yoga process;
but whatever one may do, unless he comes to the point of surrendering to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, no process can give him liberation.
One may ask if this means that those who are undergoing so much
penance and austerity by strictly following the rules and regulations are
endeavoring in vain. The answer is given by Srimad-Bhagavatam

237
238 Teachings of Lord Kapila

(10.2.32): ye ‘nye ravindadksa vimukta-maninah. Lord Brahma and
other demigods prayed to the Lord when Krsna was in the womb of
Devaki: “My dear lotus-eyed Lord, there are persons who are puffed up
with the thought that they have become liberated or one with God or
have become God, but they are unintelligent.”’ It is stated that their intelligence, whether high or low, is not even purified. With purified intelligence, a living entity cannot think otherwise than to surrender.
Bhagavad-gitd, therefore, confirms that purified intelligence arises in a
very wise man. Bahiindm janmandm ante jfiidnavadn mdm prapadyate.
After many, many births, one who is actually advanced in intelligence
surrenders unto the Supreme Lord.

Without surrendering, one cannot achieve liberation. The Bhdgavatam says, “Those who are simply puffed up, thinking themselves
liberated by some nondevotional process, are not intelligent because they
have not yet surrendered unto You. In spite of executing all kinds of
austerities and penances or even arriving at the brink of Brahman
realization, they think that they are in the effulgence of Brahman. But
actually, because they have no transcendental activities, they fall down to
material activities.’” One should not be satisfied simply with knowing
that he is Brahman. He must engage himself in the service of the
Supreme Brahman; that is bhakti. The engagement of Brahman should
be the service of Parabrahman. It is said that unless one becomes Brahman, one cannot serve Brahman. The Supreme Brahman is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and the living entity is also Brahman. Without
realizing that he is Brahman, spirit soul, an eternal servitor of the Lord,
if one simply thinks that he is Brahman, his realization is only theoretical. He has to realize and at the same time engage himself in the devotional service of the Lord; then he can exist in the Brahman status.
Otherwise he falls down.

The Bhdgavatam says that because nondevotees neglect the transcendental loving service of the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead,
their intelligence is not pure, and therefore they fall down. The living
entity must have some activity. If he does not engage in the activity of
transcendental service, he must fall down to material activity. As soon as
one falls down to material activity, there is no rescue from the cycle of
birth and death. It is stated here by Lord Kapila, ““Without My mercy”
(ndnyatra mad-bhagavatah). The Lord is stated here to be Bhagavan,
238 Teachings of Lord Kapila

(10.2.32): ye ‘nye ’ravindaksa vimukta-maninah. Lord Brahma and
other demigods prayed to the Lord when Krsna was in the womb of
Devaki: “‘My dear lotus-eyed Lord, there are persons who are puffed up
with the thought that they have become liberated or one with God or
have become God, but they are unintelligent.”’ It is stated that their intelligence, whether high or low, is not even purified. With purified intelligence, a living entity cannot think otherwise than to surrender.
Bhagavad-gitd, therefore, confirms that purified intelligence arises in a
very wise man. Bahiindm janmandm ante jidnavan mam prapadyate.
After many, many births, one who is actually advanced in intelligence
surrenders unto the Supreme Lord.

Without surrendering, one cannot achieve liberation. The Bhdgavatam says, “Those who are simply puffed up, thinking themselves
liberated by some nondevotional process, are not intelligent because they
have not yet surrendered unto You. In spite of executing all kinds of
austerities and penances or even arriving at the brink of Brahman
realization, they think that they are in the effulgence of Brahman. But
actually, because they have no transcendental activities, they fall down to
material activities.’’ One should not be satisfied simply with knowing
that he is Brahman. He must engage himself in the service of the
Supreme Brahman; that is bhakti. The engagement of Brahman should
be the service of Parabrahman. It is said that unless one becomes Brahman, one cannot serve Brahman. The Supreme Brahman is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and the living entity is also Brahman. Without
realizing that he is Brahman, spirit soul, an eternal servitor of the Lord,
if one simply thinks that he is Brahman, his realization is only theoretical. He has to realize and at the same time engage himself in the devotional service of the Lord; then he can exist in the Brahman status.
Otherwise he falls down.

The Bhdgavatam says that because nondevotees neglect the transcendental loving service of the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead,
their intelligence is not pure, and therefore they fall down. The living
entity must have some activity. If he does not engage in the activity of
transcendental service, he must fall down to material activity. As soon as
one falls down to material activity, there is no rescue from the cycle of
birth and death. It is stated here by Lord Kapila, ““Without My mercy”
(ndnyatra mad-bhagavatah). The Lord is stated here to be Bhagavan,
Taking Shelter of Krsna, the Supreme Controller 239

the Supreme Personality of Godhead, indicating that He is full of all opulences and is therefore perfectly competent to deliver one from the cycle
of birth and death. He is also called pradhdna because He is the
Supreme. He is equal to everyone, but to one who surrenders to Him He
is especially favorable. It is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gitd that the
Lord is equal to everyone; no one is His enemy and no one is His friend.
But to one who surrenders unto Him, He is especially inclined. By the
erace of the Lord, simply by surrendering unto Him one can get out of
this cycle of birth and death. Otherwise, he may go on in many, many
lives and may many times attempt other processes for liberation.

Presently we are so dull and foolish that we do not know what is
bhayam and tivram. The word tivram means “very terrible,’ and
bhayam means “‘very fearsome.” We are entangled by a very terrible
fear, but we have become so dull due to the spell of maya that we do not
care. At the time of death there are many troubles, and we become very
fearful. Sometimes, when a person is dying, he falls into a coma and lies
unconscious. We do not know what kind of fearful test this person is
undergoing. He may be dreaming so many things, or he may be crying.
He cannot express what is going on. Those who are very sinful especially
die in that way. After death, one has to enter into the womb of another
mother. That is also a very fearful stage. One becomes packed in a bag,
and this bag is filled with stool and urine, and one has to remain packed
in this airtight bag for nine months.

This is a horrible situation, but we have forgotten all about it.
Therefore Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita that our real trouble is janmamrtyu—birth and death. When the living entity is packed in the womb,
unable to move, he prays to God, “‘Please relieve me from this horrible
condition. If You relieve me, I shall worship You.” Finally, after nine
months, the living entity emerges from the womb, and then he also
undergoes so many troubles trying to adjust to the atmosphere of a new
planet. As an infant, he cries and cries, and he is totally dependent on his
mother’s mercy. Sometimes a mother cannot understand what the child
wants. Sometimes an ant may be biting the child, but the mother thinks
that the child is hungry. There are bugs, worms, mosquitoes, stool,
urine and so many things attacking the new body. These are the
threefold miseries, yet we think that we have made such progress. We
are being attacked moment after moment by one thing after another, yet

 
240 Teachings of Lord Kapila

people close their eyes to birth, old age, disease and death. The atheists
want to forget these miseries, and therefore they like to think that there
is no life after death. They are like ostriches, who stick their head in the
ground when an enemy approaches.

Although the living entity in the womb promises to worship Krsna,
when he is delivered from the womb he does not fulfill his promise. As
soon as he is born and grows up, he begins to acquire a good bank
balance, a wife and children and then begins to think that his problems
are solved and that he will live very happily. Actually his problems are
not solved. He may have some temporary facilities, but the main problem
is still there. Every minute, every second, people are dying and going to
Yamaraja. Those who are living are thinking that they will not die. They
see that their friends are dying, but somehow or other they think that
they are eternal. Yudhisthira Maharaja said that this was the most amazing thing in the world. No one thinks that he is going to die, although
everyone else is dying.

The living entity thinks that he is very happy in whatever body he
gets. He may get the body of a dog or the body of a cat, but he is happy in
his body, and he does not want to lose it. This is called illusion. When an
ant sees danger, he will run like anything. This is because he values his
body and does not want to lose it. Once Lord Indra, the King of the
heavenly planets, was cursed by Brhaspati to become a hog. He was going
about on earth enjoying his hog body when finally Lord Brahma came
and told him, “My dear Indra, you have suffered enough. Now come
with me and return to your heavenly kingdom.”’ Indra in the form of a
hog said, ““Where shall I go?”’ “*To the heavens,” Lord Brahmi replied.
It was then that Indra said, “‘No, I have my family and children. How can
I go? I am very happy. Let me remain here.” In this way, everyone is
thinking that he is very happy, although he is in a horrible and fearsome
condition. However, one who is actually intelligent can understand that
he is not actually happy, that he is suffering. It is said that ignorance is
bliss, but this is the bliss of a hog. When one actually comes to the understanding that he is not actually happy in the material world, he can begin
to relieve his suffering.

There is no possibility of being liberated from suffering without taking shelter at Krsna’s lotus feet. People are thinking that they can relieve
suffering through abortion, by killing the child within the womb. In this
Taking Shelter of Krsna, the Supreme Controller 241

way they are committing one sin after another and becoming more and
more entangled. Consequently the aborted living entity will have to enter
into the womb of another mother in order to undergo the birth that he is
destined to take. Then, when he enters the womb of another mother, he
may again be killed, and for many years he may not be allowed to see the
light of the sun. In this Kali-yuga, people are becoming so sinful that
there is no possibility of rescue unless one takes to Krsna consciousness.
The entire human civilization is falling into the illusory fire of maya.
People fly into the fire just like moths. When there is a beautiful fire,
moths come from a long distance, enter it and go pop, pop, pop. In this
way one dies, takes birth and suffers and dies again.

Yet Krsna and His devotees are so kind and compassionate that they
are unhappy to see all the misery of this material world. Krsna is the
father of all living entities, and He is very unhappy to see His sons
suffer. Krsna therefore comes and canvasses: ‘Why are you captivated
by this false, so-called happiness? Give up all of this and surrender to
Me. Come to Me, and I will relieve you. You will then live happily, eternally and blissfully. You will not have any want, nor will you be troubled
by anything.”’ For this reason Krsna comes. Actually He has no other
business to carry out here because His agent prakrti does everything.
Nonetheless, out of compassion Krsna comes in His original form or in an
incarnation like Kapiladeva. Krsna also sends His representative, who
says, “You rascal! Simply take shelter of Krsna and be happy.”

Krsna comes once in a day of Brahma, and His incarnations also come,
to educate foolish people who think that they are living happily on this
earth. Kapiladeva comes to propound this Sankhya philosophy, which is
unalloyed devotion to the Lord. Herein Kapiladeva says that one is condemned to death unless he takes shelter of the Lord. There is no other
way to be saved. We are all in a very fearful situation, but we do not
understand this. Under the spell of mdyd, we are thinking we are very
happy, but this is not a fact. If we want relief from our dangerous situation, we have to surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
revive our old connection with Him. What is that connection? We are all
His eternal servants. We should not foolishly think that we can become
one with God or equal to God. This is all the result of rascaldom. The
beginning of knowledge is to understand that we are the eternal sons and
servants of Krsna. There is no difference between a son and a servant.

 
 

242 Teachings of Lord Kapila

The son serves the father, just as the servant serves the master. There is
affection between master and servant and son and father. The father also
serves the son in so many ways; therefore the relationship is reciprocal.
Caitanya Mahaprabhu has defined our original svariipa, our original
identity, as that of eternal servant. People are artificially thinking, “I am
independent. I am no one’s servant. I have become God. I have become
Bhagavan. I am this, or I am that.”

In the material world, it is not very pleasant to be a servant of anyone.
We think that being God’s servant is like this because we are materially
infected. We are thinking that being a servant of God is like being a servant of some man, but in the spiritual world the servant and the served
are the same. For instance, the guru is the servant of Krsna, but he is
accepted as Krsna.

sdksdd dharitvena samasta-Ssdstrair
uktas tatha bhavyata eva sadbhih

kintu prabhor yah priya eva tasya
vande guroh Sri-caranadravindam

‘The spiritual master is to be honored as much as the Supreme Lord because he is the most confidential servitor of the Lord. This is
acknowledged in all revealed scriptures and followed by all authorities.
Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of such a
spiritual master, who is a bona fide representative of Sri Hari [Krsna].”’
(Gurv-astaka 7) This is the verdict of all sastras. The guru never says, “‘I
am Krsna, I am God, I am Bhagavan.” Rather, the guru says, ““I am the
most humble servant of the servant of the servant of God.” He does not
even say that he is the direct servant. Rather, he is the servant
one hundred times removed. Gopi-bhartuh pada-kamalayor ddsadadsdnudasa. We should not try to become direct servants, for that is not
possible. First of all we must become the servant of the servant. The guru
is the servant of Krsna, and if we become his servant, we become an actual bona fide servant. That is our real position. Therefore Caitanya
Mahaprabhu prays:

ayi nanda-tanuja kinkaram
patitam mam visame bhavambudhau
Taking Shelter of Krsna, the Supreme Controller 243

‘O son of Nanda Maharaja, I am Your eternal servant, but somehow or
other I have fallen into this ocean of birth and death.” (Siksdstaka 5)
Caitanya Mahaprabhu addresses the Supreme Lord Krsna as the son of
Nanda Maharaja. Krsna is very pleased if one addresses Him as the son of
Vasudeva, Yasoda or Maharaja Nanda. Krsna likes to be named in relation to His pure devotees. Therefore He is called Yasoda-nandana,
Nanda-nandana, Vasudeva-nandana, Radhikd-ramana and so on. Thus
Caitanya Mahaprabhu addresses Krsna in this way. He says that although
He is Krsna’s eternal servant, somehow He has fallen into the ocean of
birth and death, accepting one body after another, dying and being born
again, not only in this planet but throughout the whole universe, in
many species of life. This is the situation with conditioned living entities,
wandering from one life to another and from one planet to another for
millions upon millions of years. We do not care about this because we say
that we are brave and not afraid. We are very proud in this way, but this
is a fool’s pride. It is said, Fools rush in where angels fear to tread. In
order to save ourselves from this fearful situation, we must take shelter
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the verdict of all the
Sdstras, and Krsna comes for this purpose and sends His devotees, who
work day and night to propagate this Krsna consciousness movement.

TEXT 42

mad-bhaydd vati vato ‘yam
siryas tapati mad-bhayat

varsatindro dahaty agnir
mrtyus carati mad-bhayat

TRANSLATION

It is because of My supremacy that the wind blows, out of fear of
Me; the sun shines out of fear of Me, and the lord of the clouds,
Indra, sends forth showers out of fear of Me. Fire burns out of
fear of Me, and death goes about taking its toll out of fear of Me.

PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, says in Bhagavad-gitd

that the natural laws are perfect because of His superintendence. No one
244. Teachings of Lord Kapila

should think that nature is working automatically, without superintendence. The Vedic literature says that the clouds are controlled by the
demigod Indra, heat is distributed by the sun-god, the soothing
moonlight is distributed by Candra and the air is blowing under the arrangement of the demigod Vayu. But above all these demigods is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the chief living entity. Nityo nityanam
cetanas cetanandm. The demigods are also ordinary living entities, but
due to their faithfulness—their devotional service—they have been promoted to such posts. These different demigods, or directors, such as
Candra, Varuna and Vayu, are called adhikari-devatad. The demigods are
departmental heads. The government of the Supreme Lord consists not
only of one planet or two or three; there are millions of planets and
millions of universes. The Supreme Personality of Godhead has a huge
government, and He requires assistants. The demigods are considered
His bodily limbs. These are described in Vedic literature. The sun-god,
moon-god, fire-god and air-god are working under the direction of
the Supreme Lord. It is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita (9.10),
mayadhyaksena prakrtih sityate sa-cardcaram. The natural laws are
being conducted under His superintendence. Because He is in the backeround, everything is being performed punctually and regularly.

One who has taken shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
completely protected from all other influences. He no longer serves or is
obliged to anyone else. Of course he is not disobedient to anyone, but his
full power of thought is absorbed in the service of the Lord. The statements by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kapila, that under His
direction the air is blowing, the fire is burning, the sun is giving
heat, etc., are not sentimental. The impersonalist may say that the
Bhagavatam devotees create and imagine someone as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and assign qualifications to Him; but actually it is
neither imagination nor an imposition of artificial power in the name of
Godhead. In the Vedas it is said, bhisdsmad vdatah pavate/ bhisodeti
stryah: “Out of fear of the Supreme Lord, the wind-god and the sun-god
are acting.” Bhisdsmdd agnis cendras ca/ mrtyur dhdvati paficamah:
‘Agni, Indra and Mrtyu are also acting under His direction.” These are
the statements of the Vedas.

If the demigods are subject to fear, what of ordinary living entities?
Material life is not very happy because we are always fearful of someTaking Shelter of Krsna, the Supreme Controller 245

thing. No one can say, “I am not afraid of anything.”’ Everyone is afraid
of something. There is not a bird, beast, human being or living entity
alive that is not afraid of something. This is because we are absorbed in
the bodily conception, thinking, “I am this body.” Since everyone is
thinking in this way, everyone fears bodily destruction. When there was
an earthquake in Los Angeles, everyone ran out their houses screaming.
Everyone was terrified, thinking, “‘Now death is coming!” This is material nature. There are many events in nature that cause fear. There are
great cyclones and tornadoes. There is excessive heat and excessive rain.
There is flood and famine and war. Yet people are thinking of being
happy on this planet.

Modern scientists say that there are no demigods and that there is no
God, that all events are being carried out by nature. It is true that nature
is working, but nature, after all, is nothing but matter. Matter cannot
work without being directed by a living being. We cannot say that matter
works independently. In the ocean we always see that there are great
waves moving. Water is dull matter, but the air is pushing these great
waves and dashing them onto the earth. Scientists say that nature works
in this way and that, but nature is not independent. We receive information from authoritative sdstras that nature is moving under the direction
of the demigods. So we cannot say that these processes are automatically
taking place. Scientists admit that nature is working in a wonderful way,
but, after all, nature is not under their control. The scientists may accept
or defy Krsna, but they cannot defy the activities of nature. Everyone is
subordinate to nature. Nature, however, is working under the direction
of God; therefore everyone is subordinate to God.

The sun, oceans, land, space and everything else in material creation
are but manifestations of Krsna’s external energy. Nothing is independent of Krsna or His energy. In Brahma-samhita (5.44) it is said that
material nature is so powerful that it can create, maintain and destroy in
itself: Srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sddhana-saktir eka. However, material nature
is working just like a shadow. If we place our hand before a light, we can
see its shadow move on a wall. Similarly, material nature is working due
to the touch of spirit soul. It is not possible for an automobile to drive itself. A person, a spirit soul, must be within to push certain buttons. Due
to the touch of the spirit soul, the machine is moving. The entire universe is similarly moving due to the touch of God. According to the
246 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Sdstras, the wind is blowing, the water is moving, the sun is shining and
the earth is revolving under the direction of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. If the directors of the different material elements do not work
properly, they are punished by their master, Krsna.

When Krsna was present on this earth, He saw that Lord Indra, the
lord of the heavens and of rain, was somewhat puffed up. Krsna
therefore advised His father Nanda Maharaja not to bother worshiping
Indra. He told His father, ‘““There is no need to offer sacrifices to Indra. It
is better to worship Govardhana Hill, which is the representative of God.
The cows receive their grass and grains from Govardhana Hill; therefore
it is better to worship it.”’ At first, Nanda Maharaja was not willing to do
this, but out of affection for Krsna, he finally agreed. When Indra saw
that Nanda Maharaja was worshiping Govardhana Hill, he became very
angry and sent vicious clouds to inundate all of Vrndavana with a flood.
Krsna then showed Indra that his power was not even competent to deal
with the little finger of His left hand. Therefore Krsna lifted Govardhana
Hill with the small finger of His left hand and used it as an umbrella to
save all the people of Vrndavana from Indra’s torrents. All of this is related in Srimad-Bhagavatam.

Thus everyone is a servant. No one can actually claim to be master. If
we simply take shelter of Krsna, we do not have to offer sacrifices to
various demigods. If we water the root of a tree, we do not have to water
the branches, twigs, flowers or fruits. If we supply food to the stomach,
we do not have to feed the eyes, hands and legs separately. Similarly, if
we worship Krsna, the source of everything, no other worship is
necessary.

Large amounts of wealth are necessary to perform sacrifices. In former
ages, tons of food were offered in a fire as a sacrifice, but this is not possible in this age. Therefore sarikirtana-yajfia, the chanting of the Hare
Krsna mahd-manitra, is recommended. Anyone can chant Hare Krsna.
There is no need for instruments, although Caitanya Mahaprabhu introduced the mrdarga (drum) and karatélas (cymbals). Otherwise, clapping in itself is sufficient. Anyone can sit down with his family, clap
hands and chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. This savikirtana is very
easy to perform. In the evening people go to restaurants and cinemas and
waste time and money at clubs and dances. They are not aware of the
Taking Shelter of Krsna, the Supreme Controller 247

fearful situation of birth, old age, disease and death. People are carried
away by the waves of material nature, and they have submitted to its
laws. We should not waste our time in this valuable human form but
should begin to solve our problems.

Eventually everything on this earth will be annihilated. At present,
three fourths of this earth is covered with water. In the beginning, the
entire earth was covered with water, but gradually the water is drying
up, and more land is emerging. Since the land has emerged, we have
calculated that this is the Asian continent, this is North America, South
America, Africa and so on. Eventually there will be no water but only
land, and this means that there will ultimately be destruction. Since there
will be no water, the heat will be scorching, and eventually the earth will
be burned to ashes. Then again there will be rainfall, and everything will
be mixed up again, and again there will be destruction. In this way things
come into existence and are dissolved. Similarly, this body comes into existence, takes a nice form, and then is finally finished forever. We will
then have to get another body. The body is like a bubble. It is present for
one moment, then it bursts and is gone forever.

We simply take on one bubble after another, one body after another,
and we think that we will become happy in this way because we are so
foolish. Krsna comes as a person like us, but we are such rascals that we
think He is simply a man, and this is our misfortune. If we just surrender unto Krsna, we will no longer be subjected to the karma of different bodies. Even if we attempt to render some devotional service to
Him and fall down, we lose nothing and gain everything. A human life is
guaranteed in our next birth. It is therefore to our benefit to accept

Krsna.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

Devotional Service: The Final Perfection

TEXT 43

Jiidna-vairdgya-yuktena
bhakti-yogena yoginah

ksemadya pdda-milam me
pravisanty akuto-bhayam

TRANSLATION

The yogis, equipped with transcendental knowledge and renunciation and engaged in devotional service for their eternal benefit,
take shelter at My lotus feet, and since I am the Lord, they are thus
eligible to enter into the kingdom of Godhead without fear.

PURPORT

One who wants to be liberated from the entanglement of this material
world and go back home, back to Godhead, is actually a mystic yogi. The
words explicitly used here are yuktena bhakti-yogena. Those yogis, or
mystics, who engage in devotional service are first-class yogis. They are
described in Bhagavad-gitd as constantly thinking of the Lord, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. These yogis are not without
knowledge and renunciation. To become a bhakti-yogi means to automatically attain knowledge and renunciation. That is the consequent
result of bhakti-yoga. In the Bhaégavatam, First Canto, Second Chapter,
it is also confirmed that one who engages in devotional service of
Vasudeva, Krsna, has complete transcendental knowledge and renunciation, and there is no further explanation for these attainments.
Ahaituki—without reason, they come. Even if a person is completely illiterate, the transcendental knowledge of the scriptures is revealed unto

249
230 Teachings of Lord Kapila

him because of his devotion. To anyone who has full faith in the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and the spiritual master, all the import
of the Vedic literatures is revealed. One doesn’t have to seek separately;
the yogis who engage in devotional service are full in knowledge and
renunciation. If there is a lack of knowledge and renunciation, it is to be
understood that one is not engaged in full devotional service. The conclusion is that one cannot be sure of entrance into the spiritual realm—in
either the impersonal brahmajyoti effulgence of the Lord or the
Vaikuntha planets within that Brahman effulgence— unless he is surrendered unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord. The surrendered souls are
called akuto-bhaya. They are doubtless and fearless, and their entrance
into the spiritual kingdom is guaranteed.

Devotional service is most important because there is danger in every
step in this material world. At any moment, our life can be finished. We
may be walking along very nicely, but at some moment we may slip and
break our neck; therefore this planet is called Martyaloka, the planet of
death, the place where death is a certainty. Regardless of how strong or
healthy one may be, one cannot avoid death. One may exercise on the
beach daily, but one may die at any moment. There is no guarantee.
Everyone wants health and security, but actually there is no security.
There is simply a struggle for existence. People are struggling for
security, but in reality this is all foolishness. People are always fearful
because they have forgotten or rejected Krsna. We have forgotten that
we are Krsna’s eternal servants, His eternal parts and parcels, and that
we have a most intimate relationship with Him. In the material world we
are situated in asat, a nonpermanent situation. When a child has lost his
father and mother, he is always in a fearful condition. He cries in the
street, ““Where is my father? Where is my mother?” If we no longer
want to be in such a fearful condition, we have to take shelter at the lotus
feet of Krsna. Krsna is begging us to come to Him because we are all His
sons. He says, “You are rotting here by repeatedly committing sins. - You
are changing from one body to another, and you are thinking that you
are a human being, an American, this or that. The next moment you may
become a dog or an insect.” People are always thinking that they are
secure, and this is called mdy4, illusion.

Knowledge, jfidna, means understanding our relationship with Krsna.
A wise man asks, ““What is my duty to Krsna?” Once we understand our
Devotional Service: The Final Perfection 251

relationship with Krsna and our duty to Him, we naturally become reluctant to engage in material activities. This is called vairdgya, detachment
from material activities. Jidna and vairdgya can be awakened by bhaktiyoga. Bhakti means surrender unto Krsna. Without surrendering to
Krsna, we cannot understand our situation. Krsna reserves the right of
not being exposed to fools and rascals. He is simply meant for the devotees. We cannot understand Krsna without becoming devotees.

Material life means sex. People work hard all day in order to have a
little sex at night. In the material world everyone is suffering from the
sharp arrow of Cupid. Madana, Cupid, shoots his arrow into men and
women to make them mad after one another; however, when one actually sees Krsna, he sees Madana-mohana, the charmer of Cupid. Then
one is no longer pierced by Cupid’s arrow. This means that one actually
becomes fearless. One can then enter into bhakti-yoga and renounce this
material world. According to the Sdstras, there is Sreyas and preyas.
Sreyas is the ultimate goal. We should act in such a way that ultimately
we will become happy. However, if we want immediate happiness and
disregard the future, we want preyas. Preyas is for unintelligent people
and children. A child enjoys playing all day; he does not want to be sent
to school to be educated. Education is Sreyas, the ultimate goal. No one is
interested in this. The Sdstras instruct us to aim for sreyas and not be
captivated by preyas. The supreme Sreyas is bhakti-yoga.

In the material world we are struggling for existence with the hope
that someday in the future we will be happy. Yet we are bewildered. An
animal in the desert sees a mirage, a shadow of water, and he runs after
this shadow again and again. He runs further and further, and in this
way, as he crosses the hot sands, he becomes more and more thirsty and
he finally dies. Our struggle for existence is like this. We are thinking,
““Let me go a little further. There will be water eventually. There will
eventually be happiness.’’ Yet there is no water in the desert. Those who
are unintelligent, who are like animals, seek happiness in the desert of
the material world. This false attachment has to be given up by the process of bhakti-yoga. This must be taken up very seriously, not artificially. Krsna in all seriousness wants to see whether one has finished
all his material desires. When Krsna sees this, He is very pleased. We are
actually busy with dharma, artha, kéma and moksa, but when we
transcend these, bhakti begins.
252 Teachings of Lord Kapila

If we study the history of the world, we see that it is simply a history
of struggle. Mankind attempts to relieve its miserable condition, but it
simply brings about another miserable condition. As we try to overcome
one problem, another problem arises. Our determination to renounce our
association with this material world is called mukti. Mukti means coming
to the spiritual platform. Since we belong to the spiritual atmosphere, it
is impossible for us to be happy in the material atmosphere. If a land
animal is placed in water, he will simply struggle for existence, despite
being an expert swimmer. We have come into this material world to
gratify our senses, but our attempts will never be successful. If we actually want to attain a state beyond fear, we have to accept this bhaktiyoga process enunciated by Lord Kapiladeva.

TEXT 44

etavan eva loke ’smin

pumsam nihsreyasodayah
tivrena bhakti-yogena

mano mayy arpitam sthiram

TRANSLATION

Therefore persons whose minds are fixed on the Lord engage in
the intensive practice of devotional service. That is the only means
to attain the final perfection of life.

PURPORT

Here the words mano mayy arpitam, which mean “the mind being
fixed on Me,” are significant. One should fix his mind on the lotus feet of
Krsna or His incarnation. To be fixed steadily in that freedom is the way
of liberation. Ambarisa Maharaja is an example. He fixed his mind on the
lotus feet of the Lord, he spoke only on the pastimes of the Lord, he
smelled only the flowers and tulasi offered to the Lord, he walked only to
the temple of the Lord, he engaged his hands in cleansing the temple, he
engaged his tongue in tasting the foodstuff offered to the Lord, and he
engaged his ears in hearing the great pastimes of the Lord. In this way all
C

Devotional Service: The Final Perfection 253

his senses were engaged. First of all, the mind should be engaged at the
lotus feet of the Lord, very steadily and naturally. Because the mind is
the master of the senses, when the mind is engaged, all the senses are
engaged. That is bhakti-yoga. Yoga means controlling the senses. The
senses cannot be controlled in the proper sense of the term; they are always agitated. This is true also with a child—how long can he be forced
to sit down silently? It is not possible. Even Arjuna said, caficalam hi
manah krsna: “The mind is always agitated.” The best course is to fix
the mind on the lotus feet of the Lord. Mano mayy arpitam sthiram. If
one seriously engages in Krsna consciousness, that is the highest perfecticnal stage. All Krsna conscious activities are on the highest perfectional
level of human life.

This verse marks the conclusion of bhakti-yoga, as described by Lord
Kapiladeva to His mother. Bhakti-yoga is the business of one advanced
in jiidna-vairdgya, knowledge and renunciation. Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya has explained bhakti-yoga as vairdgya-vidyd-nija-bhakti-yoga.
Bhakti-yoga begins when we accept Krsna’s instructions:

sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam saranam vraja

‘Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me.”
(Bg. 18.66)

We have to renounce all material engagements and accept the lotus
feet of Krsna. We are making one plan after another to be happy in this
material world, but this place is certified by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as duhkhalayam asdsvatam, a place of misery. This material
world is actually meant for misery, just as a prison house is meant for
punishment. Once we attain our constitutional position of brahma-bhita,
we can enter the kingdom of God, the spiritual world. By karma-yoga we
attempt to get out of the gross body, and by jridna-yoga we attempt to get
out of the subtle body, but by bhakti-yoga we can directly transcend both
the subtle body (mind, intelligence and ego) and the gross material body.
Then we can be situated on the spiritual platform in our original, spiritual body. As long as we are in the subtle and gross bodies, we are suffering under the three modes of material nature. Once we enter into the devotional service of the Lord, we are immediately situated on the platform
254 Teachings of Lord Kapila

of brahma-bhita. Aham brahmasmi (“I am Brahman’’) is simply
theoretical knowledge, but when one actually renders devotional service,
one is situated in practical knowledge. Then one is no longer on the material platform but on the Brahman platform.

Prahlada Maharaja rendered the best service to his father,
Hiranyakasipu, by having him killed by Lord Nrsimmhadeva. Superficially
it appeared that Prahlada Maharaja did not help his father, but this was
not the case. In the Sdstras it is said that if a person, even though a
demon, is killed by God, he is immediately liberated. Prahlada Maharaja
was thinking, “‘My father is so sinful and so much opposed to God consciousness that he might not be liberated.” After Lord Nrsimha killed
Hiranyakasipu, Prahlada Maharaja told the Lord, ‘My dear Lord, may I
ask one thing from You? My father was a great atheist, and he committed
many offenses at Your lotus feet. Now You have killed him. I request that
he be excused and be given liberation.”’ Actually Hiranyakasipu was
already liberated, yet his affectionate son was anxious to know whether
he was liberated or not. It is confirmed by the Lord that not only does a
Vaisnava’s father, but everyone for twenty-one generations before a
Vaisnava receives liberation. Thus by serving the Lord, one renders the
best service to his family, because twenty-one generations are liberated if
one becomes a pure Vaisnava.

The yogi’s real business is to focus his mind on Krsna. That is the real
yoga system. There are many gymnastics performed by yogis, but all this
is recommended for those who are overly concerned with the body. Rendering service to Krsna twenty-four hours daily is called bhakti-yoga,
and that is real samadhi. People are working hard day and night to enjoy
some results. A person in bhakti-yoga works hard day and night but
offers the results to Krsna. There is a great difference between a bhaktiyogi and an ordinary karmi. Ordinary karmis cannot understand that the
bhaktas are on the transcendental platform.

As we have stated before, there are innumerable forms of God—
Rama, Nrsimha, Varaha, Krsna, Kapiladeva, Balaréma and so on. Sometimes foolish people ask, ““You are worshiping Krsna. Why don’t you
worship Rama?’ Actually there is no difference between Krsna and
Rama, but everyone has his preference. For instance, Hanuman was particularly devoted to Lord Ramacandra. The gopis are exclusively devoted
to Lord Krsna. This does not make any real difference. The Lord appears
Devotional Service: The Final Perfection 255

in different forms, but in all cases He is the Lord. Once Krsna left the
gopis and changed into His four-handed Visnu form. The gopis went out
searching for Krsna, and when they saw the four-handed Visnu form,
they did not offer much respect. They simply wanted to see Krsna. Actually there is no difference between Krsna and Visnu, but every devotee
has a particular inclination. In the Vaisnava-sampradaya, some devotees
worship Radhad-Krsna, and others worship Sita-Rama and LaksmiNarayana. Some also worship Rukmini-Krsna. All of these are the same,
and all of the devotees are Vaisnavas. Whether one chants Hare Krsna or
Hare Rama, it is not very important. Worship of the demigods, however,
is not recommended. In any case, bhakti-yoga begins with hearing —
Sravanam kirtanam. After one has heard from the right source and is
convinced, one will automatically perform kirtana. Kirtana means
glorification. Kirtana is preaching, glorifying and speaking about the
Lord. Pariksit Maharaja attained perfection simply by listening to
Srimad-Bhagavatam. This is Sravanam kirtanam. Pariksit Maharaja was
listening, and Sukadeva Gosvami was performing hkirtana by describing
the glories of the Lord. Prthu Maharaja simply worshiped the Lord, and
Laksmidevi massaged Visnu’s lotus feet. Arjuna made friends with the
Lord, and Hanuman carried out the orders of Lord Ramacandra. Bali
Maharaja offered everything he had to the Lord in the form of
Vamanadeva, and after he had offered all his possessions, he offered his
body. There are many examples, but at the present moment, if we simply
hear about Krsna, that is sufficient. God has given us ears, and we need
only go to a realized soul and hear about Krsna from him. This is the process recommended for this age because people are 29) fallen and are
uneducated.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu recommends that we search out a devotee
regardless of our position. There is no need to change our position; it is
better to remain where we are and simply hear about Krsna. The Krsna
consciousness movement is meant to give everybody an opportunity to
hear about Krsna. Krsna is within everyone’s heart, and as soon as He
sees that one is interested in Him, He helps. This is the beginning of
bhakti.

Even if we do not understand this philosophy, we will be purified if we
hear what Krsna says. This is the whole process of hari-sarikirtana. One
doesn’t even have to understand what this Hare Krsna is. One only has to
256 Teachings of Lord Kapila

hear to be purified. Unless one is purified, one cannot understand God.
There are many contaminations within the heart, and the people in this
age are engaged in many sinful activities—illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. The whole world is revolving about these
things, yet despite this we have to spread this Krsna consciousness movement. There may be many obstacles, but they can all be transcended by
Krsna’s mercy. We only have to be determined in our devotion. The rest
will follow. This is the essence of Lord Kapila’s instructions to His
mother.
Appendixes
The Author

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupdada appeared in
this world in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his spiritual master,
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami, in Calcutta in 1922. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, a prominent religious scholar and the founder of
sixty-four Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic institutes), liked this educated young
man and convinced him to dedicate his life to teaching Vedic knowledge.
Srila Prabhupada became his student, and eleven years later (1933) at
Allahabad he became his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura requested Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge
through the English language. In the years that followed, Srila Prabhupada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-gitd, assisted the Gaudiya
Matha in its work and, in 1944, without assistance, started an English
fortnightly magazine, edited it, typed the manuscripts and checked the
galley proofs. He even distributed the individual copies freely and struggled to maintain the publication. Once begun, the magazine never
stopped; it is now being continued by his disciples in the West and is
published in twelve languages.

Recognizing Srila Prabhupada’s philosophical learning and devotion,
the Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with the title
“Bhaktivedanta.” In 1950, at the age of fifty-four, Srila Prabhupada
retired from married life, adopting the vanaprastha (retired) order to
devote more time to his studies and writing. Srila Prabhupada traveled to
the holy city of Vrndavana, where he lived in very humble circumstances in the historic medieval temple of Radha-Daimodara. There he
engaged for several years in deep study and writing. He accepted the renounced order of life (sannydsa) in 1959. At Radhd-Damodara, Srila
Prabhupada began work on his life’s masterpiece: a multivolume translation of and commentary on the eighteen-thousand- verse SrimadBhagavatam (Bhagavata Purana). He also wrote Easy Journey to Other
Planets.

After publishing three volumes of Bhagavatam, Srila Prabhupada
came to the United States, in 1965, to fulfill the mission of his spiritual
master. Since that time, His Divine Grace has written over sixty volumes

259
260 Teachings of Lord Kapila

of authoritative translations, commentaries and summary studies of the
philosophical and religious classics of India.

In 1965, when he first arrived by freighter in New York City, Srila
Prabhupada was practically penniless. It was after almost a year of great
difficulty that he established the International Society for Krishna Consciousness in July of 1966. Under his careful guidance, the Society has
erown within a decade to a worldwide confederation of more than one
hundred asramas, schools, temples, institutes and farm communities.

In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vrndavana, an experimental
Vedic community in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by the success of
New Vrndavana, now a thriving farm community of more than one thousand acres, his students have since founded several similar communities
in the United States and abroad.

In 1972, His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary and
secondary education in the West by founding the Gurukula school in
Dallas, Texas. Since then, under his supervision, his disciples have
established children’s schools throughout the United States and the rest
of the world. As of 1977, there are twenty gurukula schools worldwide,
with the principal educational center now located in Vrndavana, India.

Srila Prabhupada has also inspired the construction of several large
international cultural centers in India. The center at Sridhama Mayapur
in West Bengal is the site for a planned spiritual city, an ambitious project for which construction will extend over the next decade. In
Vrndavana, India, is the magnificent Krsna-Balarama Temple and International Guesthouse. There are also major cultural and educational centers in Bombay and the holy city of Puri in Orissa. Other centers are
planned in a dozen other important locations on the Subcontinent.

Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution, however, is his
books. Highly respected by the academic community for their authoritativeness, depth and clarity, they are used as standard textbooks in
numerous college courses. His writings have been translated into twentythree languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, established in 1972 exclusively to publish the works of His Divine Grace, has thus become the
world’s largest publisher of books in the field of Indian religion and philosophy. Its principal project is the ongoing publication of Srila Prabhupada’s celebrated multivolume translation of and commentary on

Srimad-Bhdagavatam.
The Author 261

In the past ten years, in spite of his advanced age, Srila Prabhupada
has circled the globe twelve times on lecture tours that have taken him to
six continents. In spite of such a vigorous schedule, Srila Prabhupada
continues to write prolifically. His writings constitute a veritable library
of Vedic philosophy, religion, literature and culture.
References

Bhagavad-gita, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10-11, 15, 16, 18-19, 22, 24-25, 26,
27, 28, 29, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 43-44, 46, 52, 54, 58, 61,
63, 64, 66, 70, 71, 73, 74, 85, 86-87, 88, 89-90, 94-95, 95-96,
98, 100, 102, 108-109, 112-113, 113-114, 117, 120, 121-122,
127-128, 130, 131, 132, 133, 136-137, 139, 145, 148, 151-152,
153, 160, 161, 174, 177, 181-182, 190, 202, 203, 208, 211, 217,
218, 219, 225, 233, 238, 244, 253

Bhakti-rasémrta-sindhu, 24, 94, 121, 139

Brahma-samhitad, 25, 34, 35, 47, 52, 57, 69, 86, 113, 115, 125, 154,
162-163, 164, 178-179, 212, 224, 230, 245

Brhan-naradiya Purdna, 3-4, 97
Caitanya-bhagavata, 95

Caitanya-caritamrta, 16, 17, 30, 53, 59, 73-74, 87, 100, 109, 110, 120,
130, 139, 159, 164, 168, 172, 184, 199, 217, 236

Katha Upanisad, 14, 73
Krsna-karndmrta, 194-195
Mahabharata, 17

Mundaka Upanisad, 33
Narada-paticaratra, 99, 106
Padma Purana, 87, 141

Siksdstaka, 70, 75, 183, 184, 186, 197, 204, 242-243

263
264. Teachings of Lord Kapila

Srimad-Bhagavatam, 3, 8, 9, 11, 17, 21-22, 23, 28, 33, 35, 36, 37, 44,
47, 54, 65, 71, 73, 74, 78-79, 80, 81, 96, 97, 108, 110, 115, 116,
121, 129, 138, 142, 181, 183, 187, 191-192, 207-208, 216, 219,
237-238

Svetasvatara Upanisad, 26, 138

Vedanta-sttra, 38, 148

Visnu Purana, 7, 27-28
Glossary

A

Acarya—a spiritual master who teaches by example.

Adhibhautika miseries—miseries caused by other living entities.

Adhidaivika miseries— miseries caused by natural disturbances.

Adhyatmika miseries— miseries caused by the mind and body.

Akutobhaya—fearless.

Anima—the mystic perfection of becoming smaller than the smallest.

Arati—a ceremony for greeting the Lord with offerings of food, lamps,
fans, flowers and incense.

Arcana—the devotional process of Deity worship.

Aésrama—the four spiritual orders of life: celibate student, householder,
retired life and renounced life.

Astanga-yoga—the mystic yoga system propounded by Pataiijali in his
Yoga-siitras.

Asuras —atheistic demons.

Avatara—a descent of the Supreme Lord.

B

Bhagavad-gita—the basic directions for spiritual life spoken by the
Lord Himself.

Bhagavan —one who unlimitedly possesses all opulences; a term of address for the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Bhagavat-prasada— See: Prasdda

Bhajana-kriya—a regulated process of worshiping and rendering service to the Supreme Lord.

Bhakta—a devotee.

Bhakti-yoga—linking with the Supreme Lord by devotional service.

Brahmacarya—celibate student life; the first order of Vedic spiritual

life.
Brahman—the Absolute Truth; especially the impersonal aspect of the
Absolute.

Brahmana— one wise in the Vedas who can guide society; the first Vedic
social order.
Buddhi-yoga—the practice of devotional service.

265
266 Teachings of Lord Kapila

D

Dasya—the servitorship relationship with the Lord.
Dharma—eternal occupational duty; religious principles.

E

Ekadasi—a special fast day for increased remembrance of Krsna, which
comes on the eleventh day of both the waxing and waning moon.

G

Goloka (Krsnaloka) —the highest spiritual planet, containing Krsna’s
personal abodes, Dvaraka, Mathura and Vrndavana.

Gopis—Krsna’s cowherd girl friends, His most confidential
servitors.

Grhastha—regulated householder life; the second order of Vedic
spiritual life.

Guna-avataras— Visnu, Brahma and Siva, the presiding deities of the
three modes of nature.

Guru—a spiritual master.

Guru-kula—the school of Vedic learning; boys begin at the age of five
and live as celibate students, guided by a spiritual master.

H

Hare Krsna mantra— See: Mahda-manitra
Hatha-yoga—the system of practicing sitting postures for sense control.

J

Jaya radhe—“‘All glories to Srimati Radharani.”

Jiva-tattva—the living entities, atomic parts of the Lord.

Jiiana-yoga—the process of approaching the Supreme by mental speculation.

K
Kacauris—a deep-fried pastry made of flour filled with mashed dahl

beans or a vegetable.
Kali-yuga (Age of Kali) —the present age, characterized by quarrel; it
is last in the cycle of four and began five thousand years ago.
Glossary 267

Kapha-pitta-vayu— phlegm, bile and air, the three humors of the body.

Karatalas—hand cymbals used in kirtana.

Karma—fruitive action, for which there is always reaction, good or bad.

Karma-yoga—(1) action in devotional service; (2) action performed by
one who knows that the goal of life is Krsna but who is addicted to
the fruits of his activities.

Karmi—a person satisfied with working hard for flickering sense
gratification.

Katha—an account or story.

Kirtana—chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord.

Krsnaloka— See: Goloka

Ksatriya—a warrior or administrator; the second Vedic social order.

L

Laghima—the yogic power to become light as a feather.

M

Madhurya—conjugal love relationship with the Lord.
Maha-bhava—the highest stage of love of God.
Maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance:
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rima Rama, Hare Hare.
Mangala-arati—an early-morning ceremony in which various articles of
worship are offered to the Deity of the Lord.
Mantra—a sound vibration that can deliver the mind from illusion.
Mathura—Lord Krsna’s abode, surrounding Vrndavana, where He took
birth and later returned to after performing His Vrndavana
pastimes.
Maya—illusion; forgetfulness of one’s relationship with Krsna.
Mayavadis— impersonal philosophers who say that the Lord cannot have
a transcendental body.
Mrdanga—a clay drum used for congregational chanting.

O

Orn tat sat—three transcendental syllables indicating the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead.
268 Teachings of Lord Kapila

P

Parampara—the chain of spiritual masters in disciplic succession.
Paravyoma—the spiritual sky.

Pradhana—the total material energy in its unmanifest state.
Prapti—the yogic perfection of being able to attain anything one desires.
Prasida—food spiritualized by being offered to the Lord.
Priya—loved one.

R

Rasagulla—a Bengali sweet made of milk.

S

Sac-cid-dnanda-vigraha—the Lord’s transcendental form, which is
eternal, full of knowledge and bliss.

Sakha—friend.

Sakhya—friend relationship with the Lord.

Saktyavesa-avataras— empowered incarnations of the Supreme Lord.

Sarhsara—the cycle of repeated birth and death.

Sankirtana— public chanting of the names of God, the approved yoga
process for this age.

Sannyasa—renounced life; the fourth order of Vedic spiritual life.

Santah—saintly or devoted.

Santa-rasa—a neutral relationship with the Supreme Lord.

Sastras—revealed scriptures.

Sat — eternal.

Sattva—the quality of goodness.

Sraddha—ceremony performed to release one’s forefathers from hellish
conditions of life.

Sravanam kirtanam visnoh—the devotional processes of hearing and
chanting about Lord Visnu.

Sadra—a laborer; the fourth of the Vedic social orders.

Surabhi— spiritual cows, in the spiritual world, which yield unlimited
quantities of milk.

Suta—son.

Svami—one who controls his mind and senses; title of one in the renounced order of life.

Svayam-avataras— See: Visnu-tattva
Glossary 269

T

Tapasya—austerity; accepting some voluntary inconvenience for a
higher purpose.
Tilaka—auspicious clay marks that sanctify a devotee’s body as a temple

of the Lord.

Tulasi—a tree sacred to worshipers of Lord Visnu.

Vv

Vaikuntha—the spiritual world.

Vaisnava—a devotee of Lord Visnu, Krsna.

Vaisyas—farmers and merchants; the third Vedic social order.

Vanaprastha—one who has retired from family life; the third order of
Vedic spiritual life.

Varna—the four occupational divisions of society: the intellectual class,
the administrative class, the mercantile class, and the laborer class.

Varnasrama—the Vedic social system of four social and four spiritual
orders.

Vatsalya— parental relationship with the Lord.

Vedas—the original revealed scriptures, first spoken by the Lord
Himself.

Visnu, Lord—Krsna’s expansion for the creation and maintenance of
the material universes.

Visnu-tattva—the original Personality of Godhead’s primary expansions, each of whom is equally God.

Vrndavana—Krsna’s personal abode, where He fully manifests His
quality of sweetness.

Vyasadeva— Krsna’s incarnation, at the end of Dvapara-yuga, for com
piling the Vedas.
Y

Yajfia—an activity performed to satisfy either Lord Visnu or the
demigods.

Yogi—a transcendentalist who, in one way or another, is striving for
union with the Supreme.

Yugas—ages in the life of a universe, occurring in a repeated cycle of
four.
Guide to Sanskrit Pronunciation

Throughout the centuries, the Sanskrit language has been written in a
variety of alphabets. The mode of writing most widely used throughout
India, however, is called devandgari, which literally means “‘the city
writing of the devas, or gods.” The devandgari alphabet consists of
forty-eight characters, including thirteen vowels and thirty-five consonants. The ancient Sanskrit grammarians arranged the alphabet according to concise linguistic principles, and this arrangement has been
accepted by all Western scholars. The system of transliteration used in
this book conforms to a system that scholars in the last fifty years have
almost universally accepted to indicate the pronunciation of each
Sanskrit sound.

The short vowel a is pronounced like the u in but; long 4 like the a in
far; and short i like the i in pin. Long i is pronounced as in pique, short
u as in pull, and long @ as in rule. The vowel r is pronounced like the ri
in rim. The vowel e is pronounced as in they; ai as in aisle; o as in go;
and au as in how. The anusvara (mh), which is a pure nasal, is pronounced like the n in the French word bon, and visarga (h), which is a
strong aspirate, is pronounced as a final h sound. Thus ah is pronounced
like aha, and ih like ihi.

The guttural consonants—k, kh, g, gh, and n—are pronounced from
the throat in much the same manner as in English. K is pronounced as in
kite, kh as in Eckhart, g as in give, gh as in dig hard, and n as in sing.
The palatal consonants—c, ch, j, jh, and i—are pronounced from the
palate with the middle of the tongue. C is pronounced as in chair, ch as
in staunch heart, j as in joy, jh as in hedgehog, and fi as in canyon. The
cerebral consonants—t, th, d, dh, and n—are pronounced with the tip
of the tongue turned up and drawn back against the dome of the palate.
T is pronounced as in tub, th as in light heart, d as in dove, dh as in
red-hot, and n as in nut. The dental consonants—t, th, d, dh, and n—
are pronounced in the same manner as the cerebrals but with the forepart of the tongue against the teeth. The labial consonants—p, ph, b,
bh, and m—are pronounced with the lips. P is pronounced as in pine,
ph as in uphill, b as in bird, bh as in rub hard, and m as in mother. The

semivowels—y, r, | and v—are pronounced as in yes, run, light and

271
272 Teachings of Lord Kapila

vine respectively. The sibilants—s, s and s—are pronounced, respectively, as in the German word sprechen and the English words shine and
sun. The letter h is pronounced as in home.
Index of Sanskrit Verses

The teachings of Lord Kapiladeva, as found in this volume, are derived from the
Srimad-Bhadgavatam, Third Canto, Chapter Twenty-five. All the original
Sanskrit verses of this chapter are found in Teachings of Lord Kapiladeva. The
following index constitutes a complete listing of the first and third lines of each
of these verses, arranged in English alphabetical order. The first column gives
the Sanskrit transliteration, and the second and third columns, respectively, list
the verse reference and page number for each verse.

Text Page
aham mamaébhimanotthaih 16 105
ajata-satravah santah 21 135
animitta bhagavati 32 193
asevaydyam prakrter gundnam 27 167
atha me deva sammoham 10 63
atho vibhitimn mama m4ayavinas tam 37 221
dtmanah sarva-bhitanaém 41 237
dtmdnam anu ye ceha 39 232
atyantoparatir yatra 13 83
bhajanty ananyaya bhaktya 40 232
bhaktyaé pumdafi jata-virdga aindriyad 26 157
cetah khalv asya bandhaya 15 105
cittasya yatto grahane yoga-yukto 26 157
devanam guna-liiganam 32 193
dhiyabhinandyatmavatam satam gatir 12 77
dvaipdyana-sakhas tv evar 4 31
etavan eva loke ’smin 44 252
gunesu saktam bandhaya 15 105
hrtamano hrta-prandams ca bhaktir 36 213
imam lokam tathaivamum 39 232
iti sva-matur niravadyam ispitam 12 17
Jarayaty dsu ya kosam l l
jatah svayam ajah sdksad 33 199
Jyfdsayadham prakrteh piirusasya 11 67
jnadna-vairdgya-yuktena 18 119
Jiidna-vairdgya-yuktena 43 249
kdcit tvayy ucita bhaktih 28 171

273
274 Teachings of Lord Kapila

kapilas tattva-sankhydta
kidrsah kati cangani

ksemaya pdda-milam me
lokasya tamasandhasya

mad-dsrayah katha mrstah
mad-bhaydd vati vato ’yam
mat-krte tyakta-karmdnas
mayy ananyena bhdvena

na hy asya varsmanah pumsam
naikdtmatdm me sprhayanti kecin
na karhicin mat-parah sdnta-riipe
nanyatra mad-bhagavatah

na yujyamanayéd bhaktya
nirantaram svayam-yyotir
nirvinnd nitaraém bhiimann

paripasyaty uddasinam

pasyanti te me rucirdny amba santah
pitari prasthite ‘ranyam

prahedam viduram prita

prasangam ajaram pasam

rsinadm Srotu-kamanam
ripani divydni vara-pradani

sac-caksur janmandm ante

sadrso ’sti sivah pantha

sa eva sddhusu krto

sarngas tesv atha te prarthyah

satdm prasangan mama virya-samvido
sattva evaika-manaso

Sriyam bhdgavatim vdsprhayanti bhadram
sukham buddhyeya durbodham

sva-sutam devahity aha

tadé purusa dtmanam

tad etan me vijdnihi

ta ete sadhavah sddhvi

tair darsaniydvayavair uddrataj-josandd Gsv apavarga-vartmani
tam dsinam akarmaénam

tam imam te pravaksyami

tam tvd gataham saranam saranyam
tani me sraddadhanasya

tapanti vividhds tapa

tasmin bindusare ’vatsid

tasya tvarn tamaso ’ndhasya
Index of Sanskrit Verses 275

tattvamndyam yat pravadanti sdrikhyam 31 189
titiksavah kdrunikah 21 135
tivrena bhakti-yogena 44 252
varsatindro dahaty agnir 42 243
viditvdrtham kapilo matur ittham 31 189
visrjya sarvdn anydms ca 40 232
visrutau Sruta-devasya 2 13
vitam yadé manah suddham 16 106
ya Gdyo bhagavan pumsam 9 99
yad yad vidhatte bhagavan 3 21
yaya padam te nirvénam 28 171
yena sambhavyamaénena 7 o1
ye ‘nyonyato bhagavatéh prasajya 34 205
yesadm aham priya dtma sutas ca 38 226
yoga ddhydtmikah purmsam 14 82
yogena mayy arpitayd ca bhaktya 27 167
yo ‘vagraho ‘ham mametity 10 63

yo yoga bhagavad-bano 29 176
General Index

Abhijria defined, 36
Abhyutthanam adharmasya
verse quoted, 4
Abortion, 240-241
Abrahma-bhuvanal lokah
quoted, 225
Absolute, Krsna as, 162-163
Absolute Truth
beyond speculation, 189, 191, 192
difficult subject matter, 182
emanations from, as reality, 23-25
personal vs. impersonal, 158
qualification for knowing, 2
story showing nature of, 230-231
sun compared to, 218
threefold realization of, 116, 177
ultimate basis of, 45-47
variegatedness in, 46-48
Acaryas
accept Krsna as Supreme, 44—45
five listed, 176
See also: Spiritual master
Acchedyo ’yam adahyo ’yam
verse quoted, 113
Activity
animal & human, 137-138
necessary for living beings, 238
pious & impious, 122-123
See also: Karma; Work
Adanta-gobhir visatdrh tamisram
quoted, 142
Adau sraddhé tatah sédhu-sangah
quoted, 139
Adhibhautika, Gdhidavika & ddhyatmika
defined, 144
Adhikdri-devatd defined, 244

277

Adi-purusa defined, 25
Advaitam acyutam anddim ananta-ripam
quoted, 25, 35, 69, 230
Ady-antavantah kaunteya
verse quoted, 74
Agamapayino ’nityds
verse quoted, 145
Age of Kali. See: Kali-yuga
Ahaituki defined, 249
Aham ddir hi devanam
quoted, 22,115
Aham brahmdsmi defined, 2, 4, 112, 124,
169, 254
Aham sarvasya prabhavo
quoted, 36
Aham tvam sarva-pdpebhyo
quoted, 73
Ahankara itiyam me
verse quoted, 25
Ahankara-vimidhatma
verse quoted, 89
Ahany ahani bhitani
quoted, 17
Ahus tvém rsayah sarve
verse quoted, 38
Akara defined, 114
Akarma defined, 108
Akhilatma defined, 124
Alexander the Great, 198
Amdniné manadena
verse quoted, 183
Amara ajfdya guru haf tara’ ei desa
quoted, 87
Ambarisa Maharaja, 144, 252-253
America, 144
Amrta defined, 160
Améa defined, 113
Anadi karama-phale, padi’ bhavarnava jale
quoted, 75
278 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Analogies

animals & modern society, 109

ass & working man, 107

avoiding water & detachment, 72

bubble & body, 247

business associates & devotee associates,
130

car & body, 235

car wreck & bodily pain, 145

cat & Lord, 149

chewed sugarcane & material pleasure, 80

crows & newspaper readers, 78-79

disease & illusion, 119

diseased eye & material attachment,
150-151

doctor & guru, 53

drop & living being, 201

drunkard & devotee, 104

fire’s warmth & devotional service, 69

frog & speculator, 223

gold & dharma, 6

gold & soul, 5

governor's visit & Lord’s advent, 10

hand & living being, 168

healthy acts & self-realization, 124

heat and light & Lord’s energies, 7, 8

honey in bottle & Vedic literatures, 207

housewife & devotee, 220

jewel & pure devotee, 222

king & the Lord, 141

king’s ministers & devotees, 84

kittens & devotees, 149

lost child & forgetful souls, 250

love for child & love for Krsna, 164

marriage & creation, 202-203

microbes & soul, 114

milk sweets & variegatedness, 48

mirage & material happiness, 251

mother & Vedas, 127

moths & human beings, 241

mountain & Absolute, 46-47

ostriches & atheists, 240

presidential meeting & seeing Krsna, 21]

prison & material world, 168, 170, 253

reflection & material world, 229

_restless child & senses, 253

Analogies
root & Krsna, 246
runaway son & fallen souls, 103, 203, 236
sand castles & material world, 66
schoolboy & devotee, 117
shadow & nature, 245
space travel & impersonal realization, 48
sparks & living beings, 84
stomach & Krsna, 246
stomach fire & devotional service, 200
sun & Absolute Truth, 218
sun particles & living being, 111-112
thief & sense gratifier, 198
tolerating surgery & penance, 153
train seat & material world, 66
waves & nature, 245
Ananda-cinmaya-rasa defined, 219
Ananda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya
verse quoted, 162-163
Ananda defined, 48, 116
See also: Bliss
Anandamaya defined, 148
Anandamayo ’bhydsat
quoted, 48, 148, 202, 219
Ananta defined, 14
Anarthas defined, 104, 111
Anasaktasya visayan
verse quoted, 24
Andantara-stha-paramdnu-caydantara-stham
quoted, 86, 217
verse quoted, 125
Angani yasya sakalendriya-vrttimanti
verse quoted, 162-163
Animals
humans contrasted to, 80, 137-138
sddhu’s compassion for, 135, 136, 139
sense gratification for, 54-55
slaughter of, 109
Animitté defined, 194, 196
Anndd bhavanti bhitani
verse quoted, 27
Anxiety. See: Fear
Aparé prakrti defined, 122
Apareyam itas tv anyadm
verse quoted, 26

Apavarga defined, 80
General Index 279

Api cet sudurdacdaro
verse quoted, 132
Arddhandnaém sarvesam
quoted, 141
Arcanam defined, 103
See also: Deity form, worship of
Arcanam vandanam ddsyam
verse quoted, 22
Arca-vigraha defined, 69, 210
See also: Deity form
Arcayam eva haraye
verse quoted, 216
Arjuna
acted for Krsna, 122, 151
Krsna sided with, 190
submissive to Krsna, 171
Artha defined, 194, 222
Arto jijfidsur artharthi
verse quoted, 160
Aruhya krcchrena param padam tatah
quoted, 47, 116
Asad-grahan defined, 78
Asat defined, 23, 78, 159
Asat-sanga defined, 159
Asat-sanga-tydga, — ei vaisnava-dcara
quoted, 139, 159
Asito devalo vydsah
verse quoted, 38
Asocyan anvasocas tvamm
verse quoted, 174
Asramas defined, 27
Association with devotees. See: Devotees,
associating with
Asuras defined, 61, 209
See also: Demons
Ataeva maya tare deya samsdra-duhkha
verse quoted, 109, 236
Atah pumbhir dvija-srestha
verse quoted, 151-152
Atah Sri-krsna-nadmdadi
quoted, 200
verse quoted, 94
Atha me deva sammoham
verse quoted, 79
Athapi te deva padambuja-dvayaverse quoted, 187

Athato brahma-jijiidsa
quoted, 57, 173
Athava bahunaitena
verse quoted, 114
Atheists
compared to ostriches, 240
fear punishment, 169
See also: Demons; Impersonalists; Kapila,
atheist; Materialists
Atma defined, 34, 84
Atoms, Lord in, 125
Attachment
causes bondage, 138
material vs. spiritual, 105, 128-129
redirected vs. stopped, 149-151
Austerity (penance)
painful at first, 153
transcendental result of, 8-9
Authorities (mahdjanas), twelve listed, 42,
192
Avaisnavo gurur na sydd
verse quoted, 87
Avajadnanti mam midhah
quoted, 4, 10
verse quoted, 85
Avatdaras defined, 23
Avyaktdd anda-sambhavah
quoted, 116
Avyakta hi gatir duhkham
verse quoted, 218
Avyakto ’ksara ity uktas
verse quoted, 19
Ayi nanda-tanuja kinkaram
quoted, 242
verse quoted, 70
Ayusah ksana eko ‘pi
quoted, 110

B

Bahiindm janmandm ante
quoted, 98, 138
verse quoted, 6

Bali Maharaja, 255

Banah defined, 178
280 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Bandha defined, 100 Bhagavad-gita
Battle of Kuruksetra, 190 quotations from
Beings. See: Living entities on lowborn persons, 43-44
Bengali proverb on detachment, 16, 72 on material bodies, 32
Bhagavad-gita on material enjoyment, 74
beyond iniperfections, 198 on material nature, 27
commentaries on, by demons, 209 on material world, 24
illiterate brahmana read, 165 on miscreants, 61
increasing pleasure from, 14, 208 on modes of nature, 90
in Mahabharata, 44 on nature’s controller, 244
perfect knowledge in, 86 on offerings to Krsna, 73
quotations from on our original father, 203
on attaining Krsna’s abode, 18-19 on preachers, 153
on attaining perfection, 96 on qualification to attain Krsna, 95-96
on being Krsna’s friend, 98 on rareness of knowing Krsna, 10-11
on birth & death, 16, 225 on receiving knowledge, 32
on Brahman, 46, 213 on saints, 132
on brdhmanas, 2-3 on self-realization, 89
on death, 16 on sense gratification, 130
on demigods, 22 on soul, 113
on demigods’ source, 115 on soul beyond mind & intelligence,
on demons, 71 04
on devotees, 99-100, 148 on source of all worlds, 36
on disciplic succession, 29, 87, 185 on spiritual world, 58
on equality of all beings, 136-137 on supreme abode, 19
on eternal individual, 102, 202 on surrender, 6, 38, 219, 253
on fools who deride Krsna, 85 on thinking of Krsna, 66
on four types of pious men, 160 on tolerance, 145
on freedom from fear, 94-95 on Vedic writings, 37
on goal of Vedas, 35, 161 on wise men, 174
on great souls, 121-222 | on work, 108-109
on highest yoga, 88 on worshiping Krsna, 22, 94
on impersonalists, 218 on yajiia, 27
on knowing Krsna, 18 on yogamayd, 88
on Krsna as beyond modes, 5 on yogi’s rebirth, 95
on Krsna giving relief, 73 treated as God, 224
on Krsna’s compassion, 127-128 Bhagavan
on Krsna’s descent, 4 defined, 14, 38, 85
on Krsna’s energies, 7, 24-25, 28 Kapila as, 4

9
on Krsna’s giving assistance, 181-182
on Krsna’s greatness, 114

on Krsna’s omniscience, 86

on Krsna’s superior energy, 26

on Krsna’s supremacy, 38

on Krsna’s waiting for us, 211

knowledge from, 198

See also: Krsna
Bhagavatim bhadram defined, 222
Bhagavat-prasddah defined, 182
Bhagavata Purana. See: Srimad
Bhagavatam
General Index 281

Bhagavat-tattva-svamsa defined, 26
Bhajanty ananya-manaso
verse quoted, 121-122
Bhaktas. See: Devotees
Bhakti
defined, 194, 223, 251
See also: Devotional service
Bhakti-lata-bija defined, 59
Bhakti-marga defined, 62
Bhakti mayi param krtva
verse quoted, 153
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu
for cultivating devotion, 161
quoted on hearing process, 94
quoted on lusty desires, 121
quoted on utilization of energy, 24
Bhaktir paresanubhavo viraktir
quoted, 8, 74
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
cited on petitioning God, 196
cited on “‘scholars,”’ 207
Bhaktivinoda Thakura
quoted on living beings, 169
quoted on material “‘ocean,”’ 75
Bhakto ’si me sakha ceti
quoted, 98, 181
Bhaktya mam abhijanati
quoted, 67, 98
verse quoted, 18
Bhaérata-bhimite haila manusya-janma yara
verse quoted, 30
Bhavadefined, 104
Bhavisyani ca bhiitani
verse quoted, 86
Bhavitd na ca me tasmad
verse quoted, 153
Bhayamdefined, 239
Bhisdsmdd agnis cendras ca
quoted, 244
Bhisdsmdd vatah pavate
quoted, 244
Bhismadeva, 192
Bhoga defined, 130
Bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam
verse quoted, 130

Bhramayan sarva-bhitani
verse quoted, 32
Bhrtya defined, 17
Bhimir apo ’nalo vayuh
quoted, 5
verse quoted, 25
Bilvamangala Thakura, 194-196
Birth
in good family, 162
modes of nature determine, 233
as no qualification, 53
as painful, 239
two types of, 9
See also: Transmigration of the soul
Bliss (ananda)
as Bhagavan realization, 219
complete realization includes, 116
ever-increasing, 179
soul seeks, 48, 169
in spiritual variety, 179
Body, material
acquisition of. See: Transmigration
compared to bubble, 247
compared to car, 235
destined for slaughter, 109
dissolved by bhakti-yoga, 199, 200, 202
fear caused by, 245
gross & subtle, 200, 253
maintenance of, 80-81
miseries pertaining to, 144-147
occupant vs. proprietor of, 34
real identity beyond, 112
soul beyond, 5, 52, 89
souls in, equality of, 136-137
spiritual body vs., 170
suitable to environment, 218
worthless without soul, 175
Bondage to matter, 128, 138
See also: Illusion; Souls, conditioned
Brahma, Lord
birth & life span of, 113
disciplic succession from, 190-191
Krsna beyond, 115
post of, qualification for, 44
quoted on original person, 61
282 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Brahma, Lord (continued)
as Svayambhi, 192
Brahma-bhita defined, 112
Brahma-bhitah prasannadtma
quoted, 120
verse quoted, 46
Brahma-bhiydya kalpate
quoted, 213
Brahmacaris (celibate students)
as menial servants, 172
strict life of, 131
Brahma-jyoti defined, 112
See also: Brahman effulgence
Brahmaloka, 101
Brahman (impersonal Absolute)
realization of
via devotional service, 46, 238
insufficient by itself, 2, 238
theoretical & practical, 254
See also: Self-realization
source of, 52
See also: Brahman effulgence
Brahman (spirit), identification with, 5
Bradhmanas (priests & teachers)
formerly unpayed, 230
qualities of, 3, 100, 137
illiterate, reading Bhagavad-gita, 165
Brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva
verse quoted, 16, 59
Brahman effulgence
impersonalist’s goal, 206
individual soul vs., 112
Lord concealed by, 124
temporary elevation to, 177, 204
Brahma-nistha defined, 33
Brahma-samhita
Caitanya accepted, 224
quotations from
on Durga, 154
on Govinda & spiritual world, 179
on Krsna’s absolute nature, 162-163,
230
on Krsna’s effulgence, 52
on Krsna’s incarnations, 69
on Lord’s omnipresence, 125

Brahma-samhita
quotations from
on Maha-Visnu, 113, 224
on nature, 245
on seeing Krsna, 57, 164
on spiritual varieties, 47
on supreme controller, 115
on the unlimited, 35
Brahma satyam jagan mithya
quoted, 23, 47
Brahma-siddhaye defined, 123, 124
Brahma-sitra-padais caiva
verse quoted, 37
Brahmeti paramatmeti
quoted, 46
Brahmins. See: Brahmanas
Brhan-naradiya Purana, quoted on chanting,
3-4, 97
Buddha, Lord
mission of, 100

philosophy of, 124, 197

C

Caitanya-bhagavata, quoted on Krsna consciousness, 95
Caitanya-caritamrta
brdhmana story in, 165
quotations from m
on Caitanya’s mission, 30
on faith, 217
on forgetting Krsna, 236
on seed of devotion, 16, 59
on seeing Krsna, 164
on servants of Krsna, 168
on service, 120
on the Supreme Master, 17
on Vedic literatures, 110
Caitanya Mahaprabhu
Brahma-samhitd accepted by, 224
chanting recommended by, 3-4
disciplicsuccession from, 191
distributes love of God, 185-186
illiterate braéhmana with, 165
madness of, cause of, 166
General Index 283

Caitanya Mahaprabhu
mission of, 74, 99
prescribes five processes, 214-215
principles of, 78, 79
quotations from
on avoiding materialists, 159
on becoming a guru, 87
on being Krsna’s servant, 67, 70, 155
on chanting Hare Krsna, 184
on desire for service only, 204
on devotee association, 130
on faithless persons, 100
on gopis, 122
on guru’s grace, 184
on humility, 183
on illusioned beings, 109
on love in separation, 186
on sddhu’s association, 138-139
on seed of devotion, 16, 59
on seeing the Deity, 211
on servants of Krsna, 107, 243
on sleeping souls, 88
on taking instructions, 53
on tapasya for this age, 82
on Vedanta-siitra, 172
See also: Siksdstaka prayers
Radharani’s emotions in, 35
Sanatana approached, 58
Caksur unmilitam yena
verse quoted, 127
Canakya Pandita
cited on envious souls, 140
quoted on sddhuw’s association, 139
quoted on time, 110
Candra, 244
Catur-vidha bhajante mar
verse quoted, 160
Celibate students. See: Brahmacaris
Ceto-darpana-marjanam bhava-mahadavagni-nirvaépanam
quoted, 82, 184
Chadiyé vaisnava-sevd nistara pdyeche keba
quoted, 141
Chanting the Supreme Lord’s holy names
for age of present, 3-4, 97

Chanting the Supreme Lord’s holy names
effect of, 164-165
open to everyone, 183
qualifications for, 183
sankirtana (congregational chanting), 246
simple process, 82
sixteen rounds on beads, 110
See also: Hare Krsna mantra
Charity, 64-65
Cheaters, teachers as, 85-86
Child’s maturing attachments, 150
Christians
praying of, 212, 222
theistic conception of, 62
Cintamani, 195
Cintémani-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vurksaverse quoted, 47, 178-179
Cit defined, 116
City life, 226
Civilization, human. See: Kali-yuga; Society;
Varndsrama-dharma
Cleanliness, 106-107
Comparisons. See: Analogies
Compassion
preachers have, 153
of sddhu, 135-136, 139
Conditioned souls. See: Souls, conditioned
Consciousness
attached to matter or Krsna, 128-129
polluted by modes of nature, 149, 150
as soul’s symptom, 175
two directions of, 105, 128-129
See also: Knowledge; Soul
Cow dung, cited in Bengali proverb, 16
Cowherd boys, 226
Cows
difficulty maintaining, 83
slaughter of, 109
Creation
by Krsna’s intelligence, 166
of living beings, 202-203
See also: Material world
Culture, human. See: Society; Varndsramadharma

Cupid, 251
284 Teachings of Lord Kapila

D

Dadami buddhi-yogam tam
quoted, 184
verse quoted, 181-182, 211,
Daivi hy esé gunamayi
verse quoted, 28
Daivi prakrti defined, 122, 196
Dancing of Krsna & gopis, 180
Daridra-narayana defined, 48, 201,
202
Dasya defined, 61, 108
Death
at any moment, 250
as artificial imposition, 131
awareness of, necessary, 16
everything lost at, 65
as fearsome, 239, 245
inevitable for all, 225
as soul leaving body, 200
See also: Transmigration
Deha-smrti nahi ydra sarhsdra-bandhana
kahan tara
quoted, 145
Dehino ’smin yathé dehe
quoted, 55
verse quoted, 89
Deity form of the Supreme Lord
accepted as one’s son, 228-229
authenticity of, 210
devotees reciprocate with, 210-213
Krsna present as, 69, 103
meditation on, 214-215
purpose & nature of, 94, 163
worship of
absorption in, 82, 213-214
along with hearing process, 214
detachment by, 165
liberation by, 213-214
Demigods
absent in spiritual world, 227
debt to, 70
devotees not obligated to, 246
devotion to, as insufficient, 126
senses work under, 194

Demigods
as subordinate controllers, 244, 245
Supreme Lord above, 154-155
three primary, 22-23
Demon(s)
disturb devotees, 212
for a father, 132
mentality of, 132
nature punishes, 7]
take pleasure in killing, 109
Desire
cannot be stopped, 129
diverted toward Krsna, 150-151
as eternal, 55
lusty, 117
purification of, 197
Destruction of Earth, 247
Detachment
by bhakti-yoga (devotional service), 74,
123-124, 165, 167, 169-170, 249
guru teaches, 66
by knowledge of Krsna, 250-251
proverb about, 72
by self-realization, 119
by serving Deity, 165
as symptom of advancement, 8
See also: Renunciation
Devahiti
inquiries by, 51-64
marries Kardama Muni, 41-42
Devas
defined, 23
See also: Demigods
Devotees of the Supreme Lord (Vaisnavas)
accept world as real, 23-24
act for Krsna only, 152
advanced, see Krsna everywhere, 103
associating with
for becoming renounced, 143
for freedom, 149
for hearing scripture, 207-208
materialistic association vs., 130, 133
recommended, 138-139
value of, 130, 133, 157-161
attachment to, value of, 128-130, 148, 149
General Index 285

Devotees

attain knowledge & renunciation, 249

beyond material designations, 181

beyond material enjoyment, 221-222,
225-226

beyond modes of nature, 149

beyond obligations, 244, 246

beyond pain, 144-148

beyond time, 227-229

Bhagavatam meant for, 207

classes of, analyzed, 213-216

compared to kittens, 149

compared to swans, 79

compassionate toward all beings, 135, 136,
139

declare war on maya, 162

Deities reciprocate with, 210

Deity form attracts, 213-216

desire service only, 197, 232, 233

detachment in, 119-120, 234

eagerness of, invokes Krsna, 231

enemies of, 135-—136, 139-140

falldown of, cause of, 162

family of, as liberated, 254

fathers of, may be hostile, 132

good qualities of, 135-140

humility in, 199

identify as servants only, 155

impart Krsna’s order, 152

inclined to different forms of God, 255

kanistha-adhikaris (third-class), 215, 216

Krsna approached via, 141

Krsna as everything to, 234-235

Krsna beautified by, 82

Krsna easily known by, 18

Krsna seen everywhere by, 164, 220

in Krsna’s hands, 222

liberation disinterests, 195, 196, 205

Mayavadi philosophers vs., 205-207

misdeeds by, result of, 233

obey scripture, 136

opulences of, increase, 226-227

paramahamsas, 79

petition Lord for service only, 209

preachers among, 153

Devotees

process of becoming, 103, 155

pure, symptoms of, 232, 233-234

reject material happiness, 158-159

remember Krsna while suffering, 146

renounce everything for the Lord,
140-141

see beyond brahmajyoti, 124

as servants of servants, 242

sincerity of, seen by Krsna, 184

time valuable to, 216-217

tolerant, 132, 145

ultimate goal of, 82

violence against, 135-136, 139-140

in Vrndavana, 166, 168

as well-wishers of all, 153-154

Devotional service to the Supreme Lord

( bhakti-yoga)
as absorption with Bhagavan, 199
advancement in, symptom of, 74
association of devotees for, 157-161
authorities on, twelve listed, 191-192
begins with self-realization, 119-120
begins with tongue, 164-165
benefit from, as everlasting, 95, 162, 247
beyond gross & subtle bodies, 253
beyond gymnastics, 32
beyond jiidna & hatha-yoga, 177, 190
beyond liberation, 200
beyond pious & impious activity, 122-123
beyond self-realization, 124
beyond sense gratifiers, 130
as Brahman platform, 254
Brahman realization combined with, 238
bypasses lower realizations, 178
Christian conception vs., 62
compared to digestive fire, 200
compared to fire’s heat, 69
criterions for, five given, 214-215
Deity of Krsna known by, 163
detachment & knowledge by, 119,

122-124, 249

as devotee’s sole desire, 204, 222, 226
vs. devotional service to others, 126

dissolves material body, 199, 200, 202
286 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Devotional service (cont.) Devotional service

as easy process, 159 twenty-four hours a day, 254

education unnecessary for, 166 unflinching, 232, 233-234

essential for self-realization, 123-124 whimsical vs. favorable, 235

eternal credit for, 95, 162, 247 See also: Krsna, love for; Krsna, worship

ever increasing, 227 of; Krsna consciousness

favorable vs. whimsical, 235 Dharma

full-time, 254 defined, 5, 6, 71, 199

goal & processes of, 177 See also: Religion

Hare Krsna mantra plea for, 196-197 Dharmam tu sdksdd bhagavat-pranitam

hearing process essential in, 255 quoted, 6, 71

invokes Krsna’s friendship, 127 Dharmasya glanih defined, 28

vs. jiidna & hatha-yoga, 177, 190 Dhruva Maharaja, 181

knowledge & detachment by, 119, Disciplic succession (parampard)
122-124, 249 for approaching Krsna, 185

Krsna known only by, 67 four listed, 190-191

liberation by, 46 guru must be in, 33

liberation surpassed by, 193, 194 importance of, 190-19]

mind must engage in, 106 knowledge via, vs. mental speculation, 189,

money for Krsna in, 151 191, 198

motivated vs. motiveless, 181, 194. Lord known via, 7
197 necessity of, 29

necessitates recipient, 124 teaches Krsna’s words, 86-87

Nectar of Devotion teaches, 161 from Vydsadeva, 38

open to all, 95 Distress

overpowers other desires, 167-168, duality as cause of, 83, 84, 90, 91
169-170 See also: Suffering

preaching of. See: Preaching Krsna con- Divya defined, 183
sclousness Dog of Sivinanda Sena, 136

processes of, 21-22, 170 Drunkard, devotee compared to, 104

purification via, 51-52, 55, 117 Duality

regulative & automatic, 117 absent in Absolute, 162-163, 231

renunciation by, 74, 123-124, 167, happiness & distress, 83-84, 90-91
169-170, 249 Duhkhdlayam asasvatam

sadhus engage in, 129 quoted, 253

sddhus propagate, 135 Duhkhavat defined, 15

as scientific, 219-220 Durétma defined, 121

second chance to perfect, 95, 96 Durga

seed of, 59 acts under Krsna, 154

seeing Krsna as youth by, 195 status of, 57

sense activities purified in, 91-52, 55 Duryodhana, 190

senses inclined toward, 193, 194 Duty

soul’s natural propensity, 120-121 perfection by, 96

submission necessary in, 183 redirected toward Krsna, 151-152

superiority of, 19 Dvija-bandhus defined, 44

symptom of advancement in, 74 Dvija defined, 9
General Index

E

Earth planet, 247
Easy Journey to Other Planets, cited on space
travel, 48
Education
of children, 172
immediate happiness vs., 251
lacking in modern schools, 110
modern, as degrading, 160
spiritual, 31-35
unnecessary for bhakti, 166
Ego, false. See: False ego
Eka-desa-sthitasyagner
verse quoted, 7
Ekale isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya
quoted, 17, 120, 168
Ekadtmatam defined, 205
Eko bahiinam yo vidadhati kaman
quoted, 14, 73
verse quoted, 14
Eko nardyana asit
quoted, 23
Eko ‘py asau racayitum jagad-anda-kotirn
verse quoted, 125
Elements, gross & subtle, 200
Empiric philosophers. See: Philosophers, empiric
Energy, material (mdyd)
compared to prison, 168
defined, 10, 154, 250
determined to keep us bound, 142-143
duty of, 204
emanates from Krsna, 36
fear caused by, 244-245
infection by, and cure, 169
Krsna’s intelligence activates, 166
living beings exploit, 68
as Lord’s agent, 64
powerless on self-realized soul, 119-120
punishes demons, 71
service to, as wasted, 122
source & utilization of, 24
spirit activates, 245
strength of, 162

universities intensify, 160

287

Energy, material
utilization of, 24
See also: Material world
Enjoyment
available to devotees, 221-222, 225-226
beyond serving ourselves, 120-121
by hearing about Krsna, 160
of impersonalists & devotees compared,
206
impersonalists seek, 48
with Krsna, 169, 203-204, 227-230
living beings created for, 202-203
material, as ““chewing the chewed,” 80
Radhardani as source of, 218-219
by talking about Krsna, 148
See also: Pleasure; Happiness; Sense gratification
Envy in sddhu’s enemies, 139-140
Eternality (sat)
attained via penance, 9
as Brahman realization, 219
cause of, 227
of Lord & His parts & parcels, 111-115
of soul, 78
Evam parampard-prdptam
quoted, 87, 185
verse quoted, 29, 33
Evolution through species, 51
Eyes to see God, 57, 62-63

F
Faith

in Krsna’s words, 217
in personal God, 60-61
False ego
cause of, 64-65
designations by, 107, 111
“my” and “‘mine,”’ 66
Family life
distasteful in material world, 203
entanglement by, 65
husband’s duty to renounce, 41, 43, 44
illusory nature of, 229

Father, duty of, 80
288 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Fear

at death, 239

everyone subject to, 244-245
Fighting, cause of, 66
Flower, as Krsna’screation, 166
Food comes automatically, 80
Fools come to material world, 161
Freedom. See: Liberation
Fruitive activity. See: Karma; Work
Fruitive workers. See: Karmis

G

Gariyasi defined, 200
Gatdsiin agatdsiims ca
verse quoted, 174
Ghosantav iti sarvato vraja-pure khedair
maha-vihvalau
verse quoted, 186
Girl friends of Krsna. See: Copis
Goal of life, 15
See also: Human life
God. See: Krsna; Supersoul; Visnu
Goddess of fortune (Laksmi)
disciplic succession from, 190-191
fools want to marry, 202
God realization. See: Krsna, knowledge about;
Krsna consciousness
“Gods.” See: Demigods
Goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhitah
quoted, 34, 125
Golokera prema-dhana, hari-naémasankirtana
quoted, 99
Goodness, mode of (sattva-guna)
defined, 1, 2, 23
knowledge expands in, 1, 2
qualities of, listed, 152
See also: Modes of material nature
Gopi-bhartuh pada-kamalayor dasaddsdnudasa
quoted, 242
Gopis (cowherd girls)
beyond piety & impiety, 122-123

Gopis
as confidential servitors, 180
desire Krsna exclusively, 254—255
expand from Radharani, 219
as fully renounced, 143
highest lovers of Krsna, 104
Gosvamis, the six, 186
Govardhana Hill, 246
Government leaders, past & present, 29
Govindam ddi-purusam tam aham bhajami
quoted, 61
Gramyadefined, 78
Grhastha Gsrama. See: Family life
Guna defined, 138
See also: Modes of material nature
Guru defined, 33, 35, 90, 172
See also: Spiritual master
Guru-krsna-prasdde paya bhakti-latda-bija
quoted, 184
verse quoted, 16, 59
Guru more mirkha dekhi’ karila sésana
verse quoted, 172
Guru Nanak, 176
Gurv-astaka, quoted on guru, 184

H

Hamsas defined, 79
Hanuman, 181, 254
Happiness (enjoyment)
absent in world, 143
by associating with Krsna, 84
available to devotees, 221-222, 225-226
beyond temporary body, 247
comes automatically, 15
compared to mirage, 291 .
duality gives rise to, 83-94, 90-91
by hearing & chanting of Krsna, 13, 14,
147
as illusion in this world, 240
immediate vs. future, 251
with Krsna, 169, 203-204
living beings created for, 202-203
by pleasing Krsna, 53-54
General Index 289

Happiness
by self-realization, 120
See also: Bliss; Enjoyment; Sense gratifica‘tion
Hare Krsna mantra (maha-mantra)
for age of present, 97, 99, 101, 183, 246
analyzed, 196-197
effect of, 82, 164
ever fresh, 208
humility in chanting, 183
mundane sound vs., 179-180
as only way, 97, 99, 101
quoted, 101, 102-103, 133, 196, 200, 214,
246
for remembering Krsna, 190
as special concession, 183
understanding God via, 58
Hare Krsna movement. See: International
Society for Krishna Consciousness
Harer nama harer nama
quoted, 82
verse quoted, 3-4, 97, 184
Haridasa Thakura, 146-147
Hari hari viphale janama gondinu
quoted, 98
Harim vind naiva srtim taranti
quoted, 237
Hari-nadma-sankirtana defined, 99
Hatha-yoga. See: Mystic yoga
Hearing
experimenting vs., 127
for knowing Brahman, 33
of Krsna. See: Krsna, hearing about
value of, 11
Heavenly planets, 221
He radhe vraja-devike ca lalite he nanda-siino
kutah
verse quoted, 186
Hetundnena kaunteya
verse quoted, 27
Himalaya mountains, 153
**Hindu,”’ as concocted, 43
Hiranyakasipu
Prahlada’s mercy on, 254
Prahlada threatened by, 132

History as constant struggle, 252
Hladini Sakti defined, 218
Hogs
happiness for, 240
humans vs., 8
Ardy antah-stho hy abhadrani
verse quoted, 11
Hrsika defined, 194.
Hrsikena hrsikesaverse quoted, 59
Human beings
in age of present, 3
compared to animals, 137-138
crowlike or swanlike, 79
envious, 140
four aspirations of, 222
imperfections in, 198
opinions of, value of, 198
orders of life for, 27
prime business of, 88
problem after problem for, 252
regulation for, 2
sense control for, 55
spiritual life for, 88
work for sex, 251
See also: Human life; Society;
Varndsrama-dharma
Human life
criterion for, 52
devotees assured of, 162
not to be wasted, 246-247
proper use of, 8-9, 77, 98-99, 110, 111,
31

for purification, 108

sddhus preach purpose of, 135-139
Humility

for chanting Hare Krsna, 183

of devotees, 199

Icchénuripam api yasya ca cestate sa
verse quoted, 154
290 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Identity as Brahman, 5
See also: Self-realization; Soul
Ignorance
destroyed by spiritual master, 56
mode of, defined, 23
mode of, symptoms of, 109
See also: Illusion; Maya
Illusion (maya)
happiness as, 240-241
material relationships as, 229
Impersonalists (Mayavadis)
advocate total cessation, 47, 124
afraid of relationships, 232
consider Krsna depleted, 230
consider world false, 24
Deity attracts, 214
Deity rejected by, 210-211
hearing from, forbidden, 159-160
misinterpret scriptures, 206, 207
monistic idea of, 201, 206
need variegatedness, 47-48
personalism vs., 158
troublesome path of, 217-218
water pot analogy of, 112
Incarnations of Krsna, 23, 69
Independence from Krsna, 203
India, Marxist literature in, 81
Indra, King
flooded Vrndavana, 246
in hog body, 240
Indragopa defined, 18
Indriyani pardny dhur
verse quoted, 54
International Society for Krishna Consciousness (Krsna consciousness movement)
chanting & prasdda distribution in, 167
concerned with soul, 175
in disciplic succession, 191
doesn’t manufacture philosophy, 198

educational purpose in, 109, 110, 131, 134

envious men disturb, 140

facilitates avoiding materialists, 159

facilitates good association, 139, 149,
152-153

facilitates hearing about Krsna, 11

ISKCON (Krsna consciousness movement)
Krsna maintains, 14-15
meat-eating absent in, 150
members of

falldown possible for, 162
as fortunate, 7, 59
mundane news disinterests, 79
never tired chanting, 179
as spiritually advanced, 8
must be spread, 256
penance in, 152
presents real philosophy, 30
redirects work to Krsna, 152
rules & regulations in, 117
for saving mankind, 243
suffering absent in, 147
tolerance in, 152

Isavasyam idarh sarvam
quoted, 72, 122, 166

Isvara defined, 86, 115, 122

Isvarah paramah krsnah

quoted, 60, 115, 176, 201

[svarah sarva-bhitanam

quoted, 86, 128

verse quoted, 32
Isvare tad-adhinesu

verse quoted, 216

J

Jagad-isvara defined, 26

Jagai & Madhai, 99

Jagat defined, 24

Jaghanya-guna-vrtti-stha
verse quoted, 90

Janaka Maharaja, 192

Janati tattvarm bhagavan-mahimno
verse quoted, 187

Janayaty dsu vairdgyam
verse quoted, 121

Janmddy asya yato ’nvaydd itaratas ca
quoted, 36

Janma karma ca me divyam
quoted, 19, 35, 85

verse quoted, 18
General Index 291

Janma-mrtyu defined, 239
Janma-mrtyu-jard-vydadhiquoted, 16
Janma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakdara
verse quoted, 30
Jesus Christ, 136, 212
Jiva-bhitam maha-baho
verse quoted, 26
Jiva jaga, jiva jaga, goracdnda bale
quoted, 88
Jivas defined, 14, 112
See also: Living entities; Soul (s)
Jivera ‘svariipa’ haya— krsnera ‘nitya-ddsa’
quoted, 67, 107
Jivere krpadya kaila krsna veda-purdna
verse quoted, 110
Jrdna defined, 250
See also: Knowledge; Philosophy
Jidnam parama-guhyam me
verse quoted, 219
Jidnam vijidnam astikyam
verse quoted, 3
Jndni defined, 122
See also: Philosophers, empiric
Jyoti defined, 112

K

Kaivalya defined, 126

Kalau nasty eva nasty eva
verse quoted, 3-4, 97, 184

Kalau sidra-sambhavah
quoted, 3

Kaler dosa-nidhe rdjann
verse quoted, 183

Kali-yuga (modern age)
chanting process for, 97, 183, 246
diminishing attributes in, 60-61
envy in, 140
everyone Sidra in, 3
inquisitiveness absent in, 173
lower modes prominent in, 150
people’s characteristics in, 3, 60-61, 97,

108, 109, 173

Kali-yuga
process of deliverance for, 97, 183, 246
sinful activity in, 109, 241
stamina absent in, 108
varnadsrama-dharma difficult in, 185
See also: Society, human
Kéma defined, 67, 110, 194
See also: Lust
Kdmddinam kati na katidha pdalita durnidesa
quoted, 12]
Kandarpa-koti-kamaniya-visesa-sobham
quoted, 179
verse quoted, 179
Kanistha-adhikdri defined, 215, 216
Kapiladeva, Lord
father of, 42
as mahdjana, 42
mission of, 1
pleased with mother, 82
as Supreme Lord, 59, 60
Kapila, atheist, 2, 45
Karanam guna-sarigo ’sya
quoted, 89-90
Kardama Muni, 41-43
Karma
defined, 10, 108
Krsna beyond, 10
living beings under, 17-18
See also: Sinful activities; Work
Karma-kandiya defined, 225
Karman4 daiva-netrena
quoted, 10, 137
Karmis (fruitive workers)
compared to asses, 107
vs. devotee, 253, 254
Karatdlas defined, 246
Karunika defined, 135, 153
Katha Upanisad, quoted on Krsna, 73
Kibdé vipra, kibé nyasi, sidra kene naya
verse quoted, 53
Kings, saintly, 29
Kintu prabhor yah priya eva tasya
verse quoted, 242
Kirdta-hinandhra-pulinda-pulkasa
verse quoted, 96
292 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Kirtandd eva krsnasya
verse quoted, 183

Kirtanam defined, 22, 29, 255
See also: Chanting

Kleso ’dhikataras tesém
quoted, 218

Knowledge

in devotional service, 119-120, 123, 249
via disciplic succession, 33, 189, 190-191,

192, 198
of Krsna, 21, 22

via guru (spiritual master), 31-39, 127,

172, 198

via hearing process, 127
Lord disseminates, 1, 2, 198
in mode of goodness, 1
as Paramatm realization, 219
vs. ““personal opinion,” 198
qualification for having, 53
speculative

as cheating, 86

goal of, 177

vs. knowledge from authorities, 127,

172, 189, 191, 198

vs. knowledge from guru, 127, 172, 198

Krsna beyond, 223

vs. surrendering to God, 237

vs. worship in separation, 186-187
spiritual, vs. ordinary knowledge, 57

spiritual, vs. speculative, 127, 172, 189,

191
in Vedanta-siitra, 37
via Vedas as difficult, 192
Kovidah defined, 15
Krodha defined, 67
Krpaya tava padda-parkajaverse quoted, 70
Krsna, Lord (Supreme Personality of Godhead)
abode(s) of, 179, 217
absolute nature of, 162-163
dcaryas accept, 7
accepts offerings from afar, 212-213
addressed in relation to devotees, 243
advent of, beyond karma, 10

Krsna, Lord

advent of, purpose of, 1, 212, 241
agents work for, 138

all-knowing, 69, 86

alone never, 84

approached via guru, 184

on Arjuna’s side, 190

arranges devotee’s return home, 234
assists from within & without, 181, 184
atheists see, as death, 225

attainable by all, 95-96

attainment of, strength for, 142-143
attraction to, as perfection, 182
beautiful smile of, as life’s goal, 82
beauty of, 179, 212

becoming “‘one”’ with, 120-121, 201-204
begging from, 196-197

beyond all others, 13

beyond anxiety, 25

beyond being understood, 35, 38
beyond dark world, 127

beyond demigods, 22-23, 154-155, 244
beyond imagination, 223

beyond material senses, 183, 200
beyond mundane eyes, 200

bliss experienced with, 180

bodily effulgence of, 52

body of, 162-163, 212, 213

cannot be cheated, 133

chanting about, 22, 94, 108, 246

as charmer of Cupid, 251

close by to help us, 127

comes as death, 16

compared to rich man, 222-223
compared to sun, 111-115, 218
conquered by devotees, 187

as conscious living being, 36-37
cowherd boys feel equal to, 226
creates perfect flowers, 7

creation activated by, 245-246
Deity form of. See: Deity form
demons destroyed by, 212
dependence on, 70

desires soul’s return home, 103
devotees of. See: Devotees
General Index 293

Krsna, Lord

disguised Himself before gopis, 255
as Divine, 85
energies of, Lord seen via, 7
energies of, perfectly assist Him, 28
energies of, threefold, 72
energies of, utilization of, 24
as enjoyer, 68, 101
enjoying with, 203-204
everything emanates from, 36
expansions of, varieties of, 25-26, 168
eyes of, 209
facilitates our desire, 64
faith in, 217
features of, threefold, 218-219
feeling separation from, 186
form of, concealed by brahmujyoti, 124
forms of, equality of, 254-255
friend of poor, 231
friends (cowherd) of, 226
friendship with, infallible, 228
giving work’s results to, 151
glorification of, 78-79, 206-208, 212
gopis relation to, 122
as Govinda, 14, 179, 212
greatness of, 113-114
happiness of, 54
hearing about
combined with Deity worship, 214
compared to nectar, 160
effect of, 11
as essential, 255
as increasing pleasure, 14
requires proper speaker, 159-160
value of, 168, 170
in heart of all, 34, 86
helpful friend to devotee, 127
highest worshiper of, 88
as Hrsikesga, 194.
imitators of, 126
incarnations of, 23, 69
indirectly illusions living beings, 64
as individual & expanded simultaneously,
125, 230-231
Indra challenged, 246

Krsna, Lord

as kaigSora-miarti, 195
knowledge about, processes for, 21-22
known by devotional service, 67, 98
known by submission only, 223
living beings compared & contrasted to, 60,
102, 111-115
lotus feet of, meditation on, 252-253
love for
as absolute, 231-232
anointing eyes with, 57, 62
as highest love, 228
krsna-premd, 164, 186, 187
Krsna seen via, 164
in separation, 186
spiritual sound heard via, 208
in stages, 104
in Vrndavana, 166, 168
See also: Devotional service; Krsna consciousness
as Madana-mohana, 251
as maintainer of all, 13, 14
as master, 17-18
as master of senses, 194.
May 4avadis claim to be, 115-116
meditation on, 190, 220, 252-253
mystic power of, 18
name of, as identical with Him, 58, 164
nature controlled by, 243-245
never alone, 84
offenses to, by impersonalists, 211-212
offering our devotion to, 72-73
omnipresent, 63, 103, 125, 163, 230
one cannot become, 201, 202
order of, as dharma, 6
as original father, 203
original person, 61
as owner of everything, 72
as Parabrahman, 126
pastimes of
available to all, 155
destroy life’s miseries, 144, 148
with gopis, 180
as historical facts, 206-207
lifting Govardhana Hill, 246
294. Teachings of Lord Kapila

Krsna, Lord (continued)
pastimes of
in Vrndavana, 219

personal feature of, known via devotees,

158

personally comes to eager devotees, 231
as person behind creation, 60
pleasure potency of, 218-219
prayers to, with chosen words, 212
present everywhere, 103, 163
processes for knowing, listed, 21-22
protection by, offered to all, 222-223
punishes big demons only, 71
quoted on devotional service, 67
as realized in three stages, 124
relationship (s) with

by choice, 234—235

five kinds of, 61-62, 180

as forgotten, 250

in knowing Him as greater, 126

never disrupted, 227-232
remembrance of, in suffering, 146
rescues fallen souls, 236
revealed to all as God, 176
as sac-cid-dnanda-vigraha, 218-219
sanction given by, 69-70
sanctions devotee’s neglect of duty, 141
satishied by varndsrama system, 27-28
scripture verifies, 179
seeing Him everywhere, 62-63
seen by eyes of love, 57, 62
seen via His energies, 7
serves His devotee, 166
as shelter, 69, 117
strength to capture, 142-143

as Supreme Lord, 6, 37, 44, 115, 154-155

as supreme spiritual master, 228

surrender to, 6, 71, 75, 98, 103, 122, 169,

174, 237-238, 239, 247, 250
thinking about, for highest yogis, 190
thinking about, process of, 139, 160
as Uttamasloka, 212
as Vasudeva, 25
Vedas for seeking, 127

Visnu originates from, 22

Krsna, Lord
witnesses all, 69
worship of, as sufficient, 246
yoga as linking with, 84, 85, 90
as Yogesvara, 18
youthfulness of, 170, 195, 208
Krsna bhuli’ sei jiva anddi-bahirmukha
verse quoted, 109, 236
Krsna consciousness
compared to drunken state, 104
preaching of, sddhus engage in, 135, 139
preaching of, superior to meditating, 153
preaching of, tolerance needed in, 212
See also: Devotional service
Krsna consciousness movement. See: International Society for Krishna Consciousness
Krsnadasa Kaviraja, quoted on himself, 199
Krsna-kamdmrta, quoted on liberation, 195
Krsna-prema defined, 164, 186, 187
Krsnas tu bhagavdan svayam
quoted, 7, 23, 38, 44, 155, 176, 216
Krsne bhakti kaile sarva-karma krta haya
verse quoted, 217
Ksetra defined, 34
Ksetrajfiam capi mam viddhi
quoted, 34
Ksipdmy ajasram asubhan
verse quoted, 71
Kumara-sampradaya, 191
Kunti, Queen, 146

L

Laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhramasevyamanam
verse quoted, 47, 178-179
Lava-matra sddhu-sarge sarva-siddhi haya
verse quoted, 130
Law for mankind, 71
Laws of nature, Lord controls, 243-245
Leaders, past & present, 29
Liberation (mukti)
animallike society ignores, 80
General Index , 295

Liberation

by attachment to devotee, 128-130
desire for, by frustration, 222

by Deity form of Lord, 213-215

by devotional service, 46, 199-200
devotional service surpasses, 193, 194, 195
five kinds of, 205

by freedom from modes, 149

for humans & animals, 135, 136

by knowing Krsna’s pastimes, 179-180
in lifetime, 168

made easy in this age, 183

personalist’s path of, 158

by self-realization, 119

spiritual body regained at, 170

via spiritual master, 56

by surrender to God, 237-238, 239

for Vaisnava’s family, 254

as valuable subject matter, 77

Life from Krsna, 36

See also: Living entities; Soul

Light vs. darkness, 52, 60

Literature

on Krsna, 155

on Lord’s pastimes as factual, 206, 207
two types of, 78, 79, 81

transcendental, ISKCON publishes, 110

See also: Vedic literature

Living entities (jivas)

activity necessary for, 238

dnanda (bliss) sought by, 116-117,
202-203

attached to something always, 129

attachments of, to be redirected, 148-151

blind to impending death, 240

bodies of. See: Body, material

as Brahman, 5

chase “mirage,” 25]

compared to runaway sons, 103

constitutional position of, 106, 111-115,
168, 213-214

controlled by Lord’s agents, 138

controlled by nature, 169

as created for pleasure, 202-203

in earth, water, fire, etc., 218

Living entities

eternal, 65
eternal occupation of, 69
false possessiveness of, 149
in fear, 244-245
fighting nature of, 66
forgetfulness by, 64
happiness illusion of, 240
as imitation enjoyers, 68, 101
imperfections of, 85-86
as indebted, 70, 141
individuality of, 201-204
innumerable, 14
Krsna comes to rescue, 236
as Krsna’s expansions, 26
life spans of, 225
love propensity in, 228, 235
maintained by Krsna, 14
meant to be enjoyed, 101
obligations of, 70, 141
qualitatively equal Krsna, 102
rebelliousness of, 168
sddhu’s compassion for, 135-136, 139
as secondary controllers, 115
as servants (of God), 17, 54, 67, 69,
120-121, 241-243
sufferings of, listed, 144-145
think they’re happy, 240
unsafe position of, 16
worthwhile endeavor for, 15
See also: Animals; Soul(s)
Lobha defined, 110
Logic, inductive, 189
See also: Knowledge, speculative
Los Angeles earthquake, 245
Love
in all beings, 228, 235
of God. See: Devotional service; Krsna,
love for; Krsna consciousness
material vs. spiritual, 180
as only requirement, 166
spiritual, as absolute, 231
Lust
Cupid causes, 251
disqualification by, 117
296 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Lust (continued)
kama, 67, 110, 194

See also: Sex life

M

Mad-bhaktim labhate param
quoted, 120
Madhavendra Puri, 191
Madhvacarya, 191
Madhyama-adhikari defined, 215, 216
Mahabharata
quoted on death, 17
for women, Sitidras, etc., 44
Mahdjanas
defined, 42, 192
twelve listed, 191-192
Mahajano yena gatah sa panthah
quoted, 42
Maha-mantra. See: Hare Krsna mantra
Mahaétmanas tu mam partha
verse quoted, 121-122
Mahdatmas defined, 5, 121, 129
Mahat-sevarh dvdram Ghur vimuktes
quoted, 129
Maha-Visnu
Brahma born from, 224
breathing of, 113
Mahiyasdam pdda-rajo- ’bhisekam
verse quoted, 142
Maitreya Rsi, 31
Mamaivamso jiva-loke
quoted, 113
Mama janmani janmanisvare
quoted, 204
verse quoted, 197
Mama paurusani defined, 206
Mam ca yo ’vyabhicarena
verse quoted, 46
Mam eva ye prapadyante
verse quoted, 28
Mam hi partha vyapasritya
verse quoted, 43, 95-96
Man. See: Human beings; Society
Manasas tu paré buddhir
verse quoted, 54

Manda defined, 130
Mandah sumanda-matayo
verse quoted, 3, 97
Man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
quoted, 66, 94
Mantra. See: Hare Krsna mantra

Manu, 192

Manusya-janama pdaiyaé, rddhd-krsna na

bhajiya
quoted, 99
Manusydanam sahasresu
verse quoted, 10-11
Marriage
as distasteful, 203
Vedic principles for, 43
Material elements, gross & subtle, 200
Material energy. See: Energy, material
Materialism, 99
Materialists, associating with, 130, 133
See also: Atheists; Demons
Material nature. See: Nature
Material world
“‘chewing the chewed” in, 80
compared to desert, 251
compared to heat & light, 7
compared to prison, 19
created by Krsna’s intelligence, 166
danger & fear in, 250
as darkness, 52
destruction inevitable in, 229
detachment from, 72
duality in, 83-84, 90-91
false possessiveness in, 149
fools come to, 161
happiness unobtainable in, 143
misery in, 144-145, 253
as reflection of reality, 229
service misdirected in, 120-121
service unpleasant in, 242
struggle in, 251-252
temporary, 23-24, 65-66, 160
See also: Energy, material; Universe
Matrd-sparsas tu kaunteya
verse quoted, 145
Mattah parataram nanyat
verse quoted, 6
Mayé (illusory material energy)
defined, 10, 154, 250
duty of, 204
strength of, 162

of universities, 160

See also: Illusion; Energy, material

Mayadhyaksena prakrtih
quoted, 244
verse quoted, 27

Maya-mugdha jivera nahi svatah krsna-jnidna

verse quoted, 110
Mayara vase, ydccha bhese’
quoted, 169
Mayavadis. See: Impersonalists
Mayaydapahrta-jnana
verse quoted, 61
Mayi sarvam idam protarh
verse quoted, 6
Meat-eating, 150
Meditation
on Deity form of Lord, 213-215
falldown from, 178
on Krsna, 190, 220
on Krsna’s lotus feet, 252-253
preaching surpasses, 153
‘“Merging”’ with God. See: Oneness
Milk, 83
Milk sweets, 48
Mind
difficult to control, 190

fixed on Krsna’s lotus feet, 252-253

formula for controlling, 157
inclined to serve Lord, 193, 194
over bodily pain, 145, 146
purification of, 106-107

Misery. See: Suffering

Mithya defined, 48, 125

Modes of material nature
bad association from, 149, 150
bodies determined by, 89-90

devotional service overpowers, 117,

167-168, 169-170
influence of, at death, 233
knowledge varies in, |
temples transcend, 226
three predominators of, 22-23

General Index 297

Modes of material nature
See also: Goodness; Ignorance; Passion
Moha defined, 149
Mohitam nabhijanati
quoted, 28
verse quoted, 5
Monism. See: Oneness
Mother, son’s duty to, 41, 43, 44
Mrdanga drum, 246
Mrtyuh sarva-haras cdham
quoted 16, 133
Muci defined, 95
Muci haya suci haya yadi krsna bhaje
verse quoted, 95
Midhas defined, 4, 35, 61
Midho ’yam nabhijanati
verse quoted, 88
Muhammadans, 212
Mukti
defined, 24
See also: Liberation
Muktih svayam mukulitafijalih sevate ’smat
quoted, 194-195
Mumuksubhih paritydgo
verse quoted, 24
Mundaka Upanisad, quoted on spiritual
master, 33
Mystic powers
devotees beyond, 221, 226
of Kardama, 42
Mystic yoga (hatha-yoga)
devotional service surpasses, 190
goal of, 177
See also: Yoga; Yogis

N

Na caiva na bhavisyamah
verse quoted, 202
Na ca tasman manusyesu
verse quoted, 153
Na dhanam na janam na sundarim
verse quoted, 197
Naham prakasah sarvasya
verse quoted, 88
298 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Na hanyate hanyam4@ne Sarire
quoted, 52
Naisém matis tavad urukramanghrim
verse quoted, 142
Na jayate mriyate va kadacit
quoted, 102
Na mam duskrtino miidhah
verse quoted, 61]
Na mam karmani limpanti
quoted, 17
Namasyantas ca mam bhaktya
verse quoted, 22, 100
Na mocayed yah samupeta-mrtyum
quoted, 80
Ndn4d-sdstra-vicdranaika-nipunau saddharma-samsthdpakau
quoted, 75
Nanda Maharaja, 246
Narksyanti no defined, 227
Narada Muni, 192
Ndrada-pajicaratra, quoted on devotional service, 99
Naradeva defined, 29
Narayana, Lord
Mayavadis claim to be, 115-116
one cannot become, 201, 202
See also: Krsna
Ndrdyanah paro ’vyaktat
quoted, 85, 116
Narottama dasa Thakura
quoted on approaching Krsna, 141
quoted on human body, 98-99
Na sadhu manye yata Gtmano *yam
verse quoted, 54
Nasdv rsir yasya matam na bhinnam
quoted, 192
Nadsayémy atma-bhdva-stho
verse quoted, 127-128
Nasta-prayesv abhadresu
quoted, 110
Na tad-bhaktesu caényesu
verse quoted, 216
Na tad bhasayate siiryo
verse quoted, 58
Na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate

quoted, 138

Na tasya kéryam karanam ca vidyate
verse quoted, 26
Na te viduh svartha-gatim hi visnum
quoted, 28, 29
Nature (prakrti)
governed by Lord, 243-245
two types of, 122
See also: Material energy (maya)
Na tv evaéham jatu ndsam
verse quoted, 202
Na yad vacas citra-padam harer yaso
verse quoted, 78-79
Ndyam deho deha-bhajam nrloke
verse quoted, 8-9
‘‘Nectar,”’ topics of Krsna as, 160
Nectar of Devotion, The. See: Bhaktirasdmrta-sindhu, all entries
Newspapers, 79
Nigama-kalpataror galitarh phalam
quoted, 9
verse quoted, 8]
Nimbaditya-sampradaya, 191
Nipat defined, 34
Nirékdara defined, 114
Nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe
verse quoted, 24
Nirguna defined, 226
Nirmdana-moha jita-sariga-dosah
quoted, 148
Nirvana defined, 124-125, 177-178,
197
Nirvisesa defined, 49
Nityah sarva-gatah sthanur
verse quoted, 113
Nityam bhdgavata-sevaya
quoted, 111
Nitya-mukta defined, 170
Nityananda Prabhu
as attacked, 136
mission of, 99
Nityas defined, 225
Nityo nityGndam cetanas cetandndm
quoted, 60, 84, 244
verse quoted, 14, 34
Nixon, Richard, 16
Nrsimbhadeva, Lord, 254
General Index 299

Ninam pramattah kurute vikarma
quoted, 108
verse quoted, 54

O

Offenses of impersonalists, 211-212
Om ajiidna timirdndhasya
verse quoted, 127
Orn namo bhagavate vasudevaya
quoted, 38, 111
Oneness
of the Absolute, 162-163
devotee’s view of, 205
with God impossible, 201-204
Opulence, devotees reject, 221-223, 225-226

Orders of life (asramas), 27

P

Padma Purana
quoted on spiritual master, 87
quoted on worship of devotee, 141
Pain, tolerance of, 145
Parcaratriki-vidhi defined, 215
Pajicdsordhvam vanam vrajet
quoted, 4
Pandita defined, 58
Paramahamsa
defined, 79
subject matter for, 79
Param bhavam ajanantah
quoted, 10
verse quoted, 85
Param brahma param dhama
quoted, 5
verse quoted, 38
Param drstvda nivartate
quoted, 104
Paramparé defined, 86, 185
See also: Disciplic succession
Paras tasmat tu bhavo ‘nyo
quoted, 117
verse quoted, 19

Parasya brahmanah saktis
verse quoted, 7
Pardsya saktir vividhaiva sriyate
quoted, 28, 138
verse quoted, 26
Paravyoma defined, 116
Pariksit Maharaja, 255
Pasandi defined, 116
Passion, mode of (rajo-guna)
defined, 23
symptoms of, 109
Pasu defined, 138
Patram puspam phalam toyam
verse quoted, 73
Peace formula, 75
Penance (austerity)
painful in beginning, 153
transcendental result of, 8-9
Perfection defined, 198
Philosophers, empiric
*‘chunk”’ theory of, 60
finally surrender to Krsna, 122
as nondevotees, 207
useless arguments among, 192
Philosophy
of devotees (Vaisnavism), 197
See also: Impersonalists; Philosophers
Pibata bhagavatam rasam Glayam
verse quoted, 8]
Pious & impious acts, 122-123
Pitd na sa sydj janani na sa syat
quoted, 80
Planets, higher, 221, 225
Pleasure. See: Enjoyment
Pra defined, 34
Prabhdésmi Sasi-siryayoh
quoted, 8
Prabhu kahe —Suna, sripdda, ihdra kdrana
verse quoted, 172
Prabodhananda Sarasvati, quoted on oneness,
205
Prahlada Maharaja
as authority on bhakti, 192
vs. his father, 132, 146
merciful to father, 254
quoted on being happy, 146

 
300 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Prahlada Maharaja (cont.) : Purusam sdsvatam divyam
quoted on desiring service only, 209 verse quoted, 38
quoted on guru, 142
quoted on material world, 23
tolerance of, 146

Prahlado janako bhismo Q
verse quoted, 191-192
Prakasananda Sarasvati, 172 Questions
Prakrteh kriyamanani on transcendence, 31
verse quoted, 89 transcendentalists relish, 77, 78
Prakrti defined, 36, 57, 68
Prdparicikatayad buddhya
verse quoted, 24 R
Prasannatmaé defined, 122
Prayendalpayusah sabhya Radha-bhava-dyuti defined, 35
verse quoted, 3, 97 Radharani, Srimati
Preaching Krsna consciousness Caitanya had emotions of, 35
sddhus engage in, 135, 139 in Hare Krsna mantra, 196
superior to meditating, 153 as Krsna’s best servant, 54
tolerance needed in, 212 as Krsna’s consort, 29
Prema-maitri-krpopeksa in mood of separation, 186
verse quoted, 216 as pleasure potency, 218-219
Premdfijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena Rajarsi defined, 29
quoted, 57, 164 Rajo-guna (mode of passion)
Preyas defined, 251 defined, 23
Prostitute Cintamani, 195 symptoms of, 109
Proverb on detachment, 16, 72 Ramananda Raya, 53, 185
Prthu Maharaja, 255 Ramanuja-sampradaya, 191
Pumsah striyé mithuni-bhavam etam Ramyé kacid updsana
quoted, 65 quoted, 122
Punah punas carvita-carvanaénam Reality vs. reflection, 229
quoted, 80 Regulated living, 2
Punya-sravana-kirtanah Reincarnation. See: Transmigration
quoted, 108 Relationships
Purana defined, 170 material vs. spiritual, 227-232
Pure devotees of the Lord. See: Devotees, pure See also: Krsna, relationships with
Purification Religion (dharma)
by chanting & reading Bhdgavatam, 110 authorities on, listed, 42
by chanting Krsna’s names, 108 as eternal occupation, 69
by hearing of Krsna, 108, 255-256 genuine vs. manufactured, 93, 97-98,
of mind, 106-107 199
of senses, 54—56 “isms’’ of, cause suffering, 146
Purisera kita haite muri se laghistha as one, 6
quoted, 199 as surrender to Krsna, 66, 71, 75

Purusa defined, 68 Religionists, false, 208, 209
General Index 301

Renunciation
by bhakti-yoga (devotional service), 71,
123-124, 167, 169-170, 249
of everything for Lord, 140, 141
by impersonalists as false, 48
maddening if premature, 143
for self-realization, 119-120
of temporary world, 66
Retirement
to forest, 226
time of life for, 41, 43, 44, 66
Rjubhih defined, 159
Rsibhir bahudhda gitar
verse quoted, 37
Rsidefined, 192
Rudra-sampradaya, 191
Rukmini-Krsna, worship of, 255

S

Sa bhagavan svayam krsnah
quoted, 45
Sac-cid-dnanda defined, 19, 20
Sac-cid-dnanda-vigrahah
quoted, 20
Sacrifice (yajria)
for age of present, 246
of animals, 100-101
Sad-dharma defined, 75
Sad-gosvamy-astaka quoted, 186
Sddhavah defined, 149
Sddhur eva sa mantavyah
verse quoted, 132
Sddhu-sariga defined, 143, 150
“Sddhu-sariga,”’ “‘sddhu-sarnga’’—sarva
Sdstre kaya
quoted, 138-139
verse quoted, 130
Sddhus defined, 129, 134-136, 138-139, 140,
14]
See also: Devotees
Sa eva sddhusu krto
quoted, 138

Sa gundn samatityaitan
verse quoted, 46
Saints. See: Devotees; Mahdtmds; Sddhus
Sa kalaneha mahata
verse quoted, 29
Sakhya defined, 61
Sdksad dharitvena samasta-sdstrair
quoted, 184
_ verse quoted, 242
Sakti defined, 26
Samah sarvesu bhitesu
verse quoted, 46
Samatvenaiva vikseta
_ verse quoted, 115-116
Samo damas tapah saucarh
verse quoted, 3
Sampraddayas
defined, 190
See also: Disciplic succession
Samsdra
defined, 68
See also: Transmigration
Sandatana defined, 113
Sandtana Gosvami
exemplary behavior of, 58
questions Lord Caitanya, 131
renunciation by, 143
Sankardcarya
philosophy of, 197
quoted on Bhagavan, 85
quoted on Narayana, 116
Vedanta commentary of, 37
Sankhya philosophy
Kapila expounded, 2
subject of , 68
Sankhya-yoga defined, 189
Sankirtana-yajria, 246
defined, 99
See also: Chanting
Sannyasis, renunciation by, 140-141
Santa defined, 154
Sdnta-rasa defined, 61
Sdnta-riipa defined, 227
Sa rahasyam tad-angam ca
verse quoted, 219
302 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Sarvabhauma Bhattacadrya, 74, 253
Sarva-dehinadm defined, 136
Sarva-dharman parityajya
quoted, 5, 34, 71, 219, 253
Sarvaisvarya-pirna defined, 230
Sarvasya caham hrdi sannivistah
quoted, 86, 126
Sarvatra haya nia ista-deva-sphirti
verse quoted, 164
Sarva-yonisu kaunteya
verse quoted, 203
Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam
_ verse quoted, 59
Sdstra. See: Scripture; Vedic literature
Satam prasangan mama virya-samwvido
verse quoted, 207-208
Satatam kirtayanto mam
verse quoted, 22, 100
Sat defined, 77-78, 116, 159
Sat-karma-nipuno vipro
verse quoted, 87
Sattva-guna (mode of goodness)
defined, 1, 2, 23
knowledge expands in, 1, 2
qualities of, listed, 152
Scarcity, cause of, 70-71
Science, devotional process as, 219-220
Scientists, material
defy God, 245
misunderstand nature, 36
Scripture (Sastra)
as confusing, 192
devotees obey, 136
heard from devotees, 159
Krsna described in, 179
misinterpretations of, 206, 207
temple’s duty to recite, 214-215
See also: Vedic literature
Self-realization
beyond body, 5, 89, 200-201
as Brahman realization, 5
defined, 70, 111-115
as devotional service, 119-120, 123
via goodness mode, |

happiness follows, 169

Self-realization
insufhcient by itself, 124
by knowledge & renunciation, 119
as prime subject matter, 77-78
Sense gratification
in bad association, 130
condemned, 51-52, 54-55

devotees uninterested in, 158-159

devotional activity overpowers, 167-168

in modern society, 130-131
personal & extended, 198
tendency toward, dangerous, 163
See also: Enjoyment
Senses
as enjoyed or denied, 130-131
inclined to work, 193, 194
Krsna beyond, 183, 200
purification of, 67
spiritual form beyond, 210
spiritual kind of, 51-52, 54-56
yoga for controlling, 253
Servant in spiritual world, 241-242
Service attitude as natural, 120
Sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
verse quoted, 94
Sex life
animal vs. human, 138
Bilvamangala transcended, 195-196
via Cupid’s arrow, 251
entanglement caused by, 65
See also: Lust
Siddha defined, 11
Siddhis defined, 42
Siksdstaka prayers, 184, 186, 197, 204
Silpa-jiiana defined, 57
Sincerity seen by Krsna, 185
Sinful activities
abortion among, 241
atheists fear reaction to, 169
defined, 64-65
flourishing at present, 109
fourfold, 59, 256
purification from. See: Purification
reactions to, freedom from, 98

results in fearful death, 239
General Index 303

Sinful activities
_ sanction needed for, 69-70
Sisyas te *ham sadhi mam tvdm prapannam
quoted, 38, 174
Sita-Rama, Vaisnavas worship, 255
Siva, Lord
as authority, 192
_ quoted on worshiping devotee, 141
Sivah panthd defined, 124
Sivananda Sena, 136, 154
Snakes, 140
Society, human
accepts life’s miseries, 133
accustomed to sense gratification, 130-131
animalistic, 80, 109, 130, 137-138
blind leadership of, 29
degraded, 3
education of, process for, 9
as harassed, 97
lacks inquisitiveness, 173
neglects spiritual life, 132
orders of life for, 27
painkillers in, 144
sinful activities in, 109
varndsrama system needed in, 27
working for Krsna in, 152
See also: Kali-yuga; Varndsrama-dharma
So ’mrtatvaya kalpate
quoted, 160
Soul (s)
beyond material world, 175
compared to spark, 84
coverings (gross & subtle) of, 200
effulgence, 112
equality among, 136-137
eternal, 52, 78
linked with Krsna, 84, 85, 88
nature activated by, 245
size & quality of, 111-115
Supersoul different from, 34
symptom of, 175
See also: Living entities
Souls, conditioned
cause of miseries for, 78, 144—148
consciousness misdirected in, 105

Souls, conditioned
See also: Living entities
Sound, transcendental, 208
See also: Chanting; Hare Krsna mantra
Spirit, infinite & infinitesimal, 111-115
Spiritual body, 170
Spiritual life
starting point of, 163
symptoms of, 8
See also: Devotional service; Krsna consclousness
Spiritual master (s)
Absolute revealed by, 182-185
accept Krsna as Supreme, 44—45
approaching, process for, 34-39, 171-172
approaching, reason for, 58, 182-185
attentive disciples please, 82
destroy ignorance, 56-57
detachment taught by, 66
five listed, 176
honored like Lord, 242
importance of, 182-185
initiation by, 9
Krsna approached via, 141-143
as Krsna’s representative, 173-174, 184,

242

preaches from intermediate stage,
215-216

qualification for being, 31-35, 53, 87,
198-199

service to, out of love, 231
Vedas assimilated by, 127
Spiritual orders of life (dsramas), 27
Spiritual world (Vaikuntha)
absolute nature of, 230-231
vs. birth & death, 19-20
everyone loves Krsna in, 166
general description of, 47
illuminated, 52
inhabitants of, 47, 170
relationships real in, 227-232
sounds from, ever fresh, 208
temples same as, 226
time doesn’t influence, 22
variety in, 178-179
304 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Sraddha defined, 217
‘Sraddha’-sabde — visvdsa kahe sudrdha
niscaya

_ verse quoted, 217
Sraddhavan bhajate yo mam
__ verse quoted, 88
Sraddhayanvitah defined, 214
Sravanam defined, 22, 29
Sravanam kirtanam visnoh
quoted, 103, 147, 170
_ verse quoted, 2]
Sreyas defined, 251
Sri-krsna-caitanya-sarira-dhari
_ verse quoted, 73-74
Srimad-Bhagavatam
author of, 37
beyond human imperfections, 198
compared to ripe mango, 81
elevation to Tenth Canto of, 179-180
for pure devotees, 207
time utilized reading, 110
treated as God, 224
quotations from
on age of present, 3, 97
on asslike beings, 81
on becoming real parent, 80
on Bhagavatam, 81, 110
on chanting in Kali-yuga, 183
on “chewing the chewed,” 80
on confidential knowledge, 219
on crowlike words, 78-79
on detachment, 8, 74, 121
on devotees, 216
on devotee’s association, 129, 207-208
on devotional processes, 21-22
on hearing Bhagavatam, 110
on hearing of Krsna, 11]
on human endeavor, 17
on human life, 8
on Kali-yuga, 3, 97
on knowledge & detachment, 121
on Krsna as beyond speculation, 187
on liberation, 238
on life’s mission, 9
on mahdjanas, 191

Srimad-Bhagavatam
quotations from
on proper attachment, 138
on sense gratification, 54
on sex attraction, 65
on sinful races, 96
on source of everything, 36-37
) on twelve authorities, 191-192
Sri-sampradaya, 191
Srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah
__ verse quoted, 11
Srotriyam brahma-nistham
quoted, 33
Srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka
quoted, 245
_ verse quoted, 154
Sruti defined, 127
Stalin, 147
Sthdne sthitah defined, 33
Sthane sthitéh sruti-gatah tanu-varmanobhih
quoted, 187
Sthdvara-jarigama dekhe, na dekhe tara mirti
verse quoted, 164
Sthita-dhili-sadrsam vicintaya
quoted, 75
Stri-sidra-dvijabandhinam
quoted, 44
Striyo vaisyds tatha sidras
verse quoted, 43, 95-96
Struggle for existence, 251-252
Students. See: Brahmacaris
Submission
for approaching guru, 171-172
for knowing Krsna, 223
Suci haya muci haya yadi krsna tyaje
_ verse quoted, 95
Sucinadm srimatam gehe
_ quoted, 95
Sudras, in Kali-yuga, 3
Suffering
as automatic, 17
from birth & death, 239
devotee transcends, 144-150
of devotee vs. nondevotee, 144-148
General Index 305

Suffering
duality causes, 83, 84, 90, 91
foolish society accepts, 133
independent desires cause, 203-204
process for transcending, 145-150
threefold, 57
types & causes of, 144-145
Suhrt defined, 143, 153
Sukadeva Gosvami
as authority, 192
Bhagavatam spoken by, 81
Sun analogies. See: Analogies, sun
Suni caiva svapdake ca
verse quoted, 137
Sinydyitarn Jagat sarvam
verse quoted, 186
Supersoul (Paramatma)
as second phase of Absolute, 178
soul contrasted to, 34, 84.
Supreme Personality beyond, 124
Supreme Lord. See: Krsna; Maha-Visnu;
Narayana; Supersoul; Visnu
Svacchandatma defined, 23, 26
Sva-dharma defined, 96
Sva-karmanaé tam abhyarcya
verse quoted, 96
Svalpam apy asya dharmasya
quoted, 94-95
Svaméas defined, 168
Svanusthitasya dharmasya
verse quoted, 151-152
Svariipa defined, 242
Svayambhir ndradah sambhuh
verse quoted, 191-192
Svetasvatara Upanisad
quoted on Krsna’s potencies, 26
quoted on Lord’s agents, 138
Swans, transcendentalists compared to, 79

T

Tad aham bhakty-upahrtam
verse quoted, 73

Tad-artharh karma kaunteya
verse quoted, 108-109

Tad brahma niskalam anantam aSesa-bhitam
verse quoted, 52

Tad vayasarm tirtham uSanti manasa
verse quoted, 78-79

Tad viddhi pranipdtena
quoted, 32

Tad-vijfidna defined, 32-33

Tad-vijfidnartham sa gurum evabhigacchet
quoted, 9, 33

Taj-josandd dsv apavarga-vartmani
verse quoted, 207-208

Talking, two types of, 78

Tal labhyate duhkhavad anyatah sukham
quoted, 15
verse quoted, 17

Tamasi ma jyotir gama
quoted, 52

Tamo-dvaram yositam sargi-sarngam
quoted, 133

Tamo-guna (mode of ignorance)
defined, 23
symptoms of, 109

Tan aham dvisatah kriiran
verse quoted, 71

Tapasya
defined, 8, 55, 82
easy in this age, 82
See also: Austerity

Tapo divyam putraka yena sattvam
verse quoted, 8-9

Tdsém brahma mahad yonir
verse quoted, 203

Tasmdd gurum prapadyeta
quoted, 33, 35, 53

Tasmat kendpy updyena
quoted, 18]

Tasmat parataram devi
quoted, 141

Tasyaiva hetoh prayateta kovidah
quoted, 15
verse quoted, 17

Tathé dehantara-praptir
verse quoted, 89
306 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Tato mam tattvato jiidtva
verse quoted, 19
Tat-paratvena nirmalam
quoted, 106
Tat sadhu manye ’sura-varya dehinadm
quoted, 23
Teachers, cheating, 85-86
See also: Brahmanas; Spiritual master
Temples as beyond matter, 226
Temple worship. See: Deity form, worship of
Tesam evdnukampartham
verse quoted, 127-128
Tesadm satata-yuktanam
verse quoted, 181-182, 211
Thinking of Krsna, 139
Time
creation & destruction in, 247
spiritual world free of , 226
use of, 216
value of, 110-111
Titiksavah defined, 153
Tivram defined, 239
Tolerance
in chanting Hare Krsna, 183
devotees need, 132
in giving up bad habits, 153
of pain, 145
preaching work requires, 135-136, 140
Trance (samadhi), devotional service as,
254
Transcendentalists
best subject matter for, 77-78

See also: Devotees; Impersonalists; Jiidnis;

Yogis

Transmigration of the soul
in body after body, 89-90, 133-134
by choice, 235
freedom from, 102
human life for ending, 137
imperceivable, 175
via modes of nature, 89-90
qualifications determine, 137
sense gratification causes, 163
tribulation from, 108

Trees, killing of, 78

Tribhir gunamayair bhavair
verse quoted, 5

Trndd api sunicena
verse quoted, 183

Trnavarta demon, 62

Truth. See: Absolute Truth; Knowledge

Tyaja durjana-sarhsargam
quoted, 139

Tyaktva deham punar janma
quoted, 20, 177

verse quoted, 18

U

Universal form of the Lord, 165
Universe(s)
arrangement behind, 125
‘‘chunk”’ theory of, 60
management of, 244, 245
number & source of, 113, 223-224
See also: Material world
Urdhvarh gacchanti sattva-stha
verse quoted, 90

Uttama-adhikadri defined, 215

Vv

Vacamsi vaikuntha-gundnuvarnane
quoted, 144
Vaikuntha. See: Spiritual world
Vairagya defined, 123, 170
See also: Renunciation
Vairdgya-vidyd-nija-bhakti-yogaverse quoted, 73-74
Vaisnava philosophy, 197
Vaisnavas. See: Devotees
Vaisnava-sampradaya, 299
Vanam gato yad dharim dsrayeta
quoted, 226
Vanaprastha defined, 226
Vandanam defined, 103
Variety for enjoyment, 48, 204
Varnas defined, 27
General Index

Varndsramdcaravata
verse quoted, 27
Varndsrama-dharma
defined, 27
divisions of, 9
as lost, 97, 185
perfection by, 96
for regulated society, 33
retirement principle in, 42-43
purpose of, 9, 152
for world peace, 27
Vasudevah sarvam iti
quoted, 169
verse quoted, 6
Vasudeve bhagavati
verse quoted, 12]
Vatsalya defined, 62
Vayu, 244
Veda defined, 57
Vedaham samatitani
verse quoted, 86
Vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah

quoted, 35, 161

Veda né maniya bauddha haya ta’ nastika

quoted, 100
Vedanta-siitra

author of, 36

difficult to learn, 172-173

quoted on bliss, 219

quoted on Brahman, 36

Vedic civilization. See: Varndsrama-dharma

Vedic literature (Vedas)
Bhagavatam ripened fruit of, 81
compared to bottle of honey, 207
for elevation to goodness, 1
formerly handwritten, 224
hearing from, vs. speculating, 30, 127
initiation into, 9
listed, 44, 192
original yoga in, 93
purpose of, 35, 110, 161
regulated life via, 2
worshiped as God, 224

Venum kvanantam aravinda-dalaéyatéksam

verse quoted, 179

VibhinnamSa defined, 26, 168

Vibhiti defined, 221

Vidyd-vinaya-sampanne
verse quoted, 137

Vigraha defined, 201

Vikarma defined, 108

Vildsa defined, 214

307

Violence against sddhus, 135-136, 139-140

Virdt-ripa defined, 165
Visnu, Lord
equal to Krsna, 255
Krsna origin of, 22
pleased by one’s work, 96
Visnu Purdna
quoted on Lord’s energies, 7
quoted on varndsrama, 28
Visnur drddhyate pantha
verse quoted, 28
Visnur mahan sa tha yasya kald-viseso
verse quoted, 113, 224
Visnusvami-sampradaya, 191
Vistabhydham idam krtsnam
verse quoted, 114

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura, quoted on

spiritual master, 182

Viyoga defined, 85

Vrajendra-nandana yei, Saci-suta haila

sel
quoted, 99
Vrndavana
as blissful abode, 219
devotee’s pure love in, 166
Krsna as seen in, 226
Vydsadeva, literatures by, 37
Vyavasadyatmika buddhih
verse quoted, 130

W
War, cause of, 66

Wealth, devotees reject, 221-223, 225-226

Welfare activity
of sddhus, 135-140

for sense gratification, 167

 
308 Teachings of Lord Kapila

Women
less intelligent, 182
Vedic principles for, 43-44
Words, worship by, 212
Work
asslike, 107
done for Visnu, 109
by Krsna’s direction, 152
See also: Karma; Karmis
World peace, 27
Worship
best type of, 141
See also: Deity form, worship of

Y

Yada yada hi dharmasya
verse quoted, 4

Yad gatva na nivartante
quoted, 177
verse quoted, 58

Yah sa sarvesu bhitesu
verse quoted, 19

Ya idarh paramam guhyam
verse quoted, 153

Yajfiad bhavati parjanyo
verse quoted, 27

Yajria defined, 27, 138, 141
See also: Sacrifice

Yajniath sankirtana-prayaih
quoted, 97

Yajriarthat karmano ’nyatra
verse quoted, 108-109

Yamaraja, 169

Yam pradpya na nivartante
verse quoted, 19

Ydre dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna-upadesa’
quoted, 87

Yasoda, 62

Yas tu néréyanam devam
verse quoted, 115-116

Yas tv indragopam athavendram aho sva
karma
quoted, 17

Yasyatka-nisvasita-kélam athavalambya
verse quoted, 113, 224

Yasya prabhaé prabhavato jagad-anda-kotiverse quoted, 52

Yasydtma-buddhih kundpe tri-dhatuke
verse quoted, 81

Yatah pravrttir bhitanam
verse quoted, 96

Yatatam api siddhanam
verse quoted, 10-11

Yathartham upayufjatah
quoted, 234

Yat karosi yad asndasi
verse quoted, 15]

Yato imani bhitdni jayante
quoted, 24

Yat tapasyasi kaunteya
verse quoted, 15]

Yat tirtha-buddhih salile na karhicij
verse quoted, 81

Ye hi samsparsajé bhoga
verse quoted, 74

Yei krsna-tattva-vetta sei ‘guru’ haya
verse quoted, 53

Ye ’nye ca papa yad-ap4asraydsrayah
verse quoted, 96

Ye ‘nye ’ravindaksa vimukta-maninah
quoted, 238

Yesam tv anta-gatam papam
quoted, 98

Yoga.
defined, 84, 85, 90, 124
easiest type of, 159
goal & process of, 83-85, 88-91
hatha, 32
mystic, devotional service surpasses, 190
mystic, goal of, 177
original vs. concocted processes of, 93
types of, three given, 177
See also: Yogis

Yogamaya defined, 88-89

Yoginam api sarvesam
verse quoted, 88

Yogis
cheaters posing as, 174, 208
General Index 309

Yogis Yosit-sanga defined, 130
devotees beyond, 18 Yo ’vagraho ’harh mametity
falldown of, 177, 178 verse quoted, 79
highest kind of, 190 Yudhisthira Maharaja, quoted on death, 17
perfections of, listed, 83-84 Yugdyitam nimesena

Yogurt gift, 230-231 verse quoted, 186
 

“The philosophical and religious works published by
the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust provide a golden opportunity to Western philosophers, scholars, and people in
general to drink deep at the celestial fountain of ancient Indian philosophical and spiritual wisdom.”

Dr. L.S. Varshneya
Chairman, Department of Hindi
Dean, Faculty of Arts
Allahabad University
Allahabad, India

“The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust editions of famous
religious classics of India with new translations and
commentaries are an important addition to our expanding knowledge of spiritual India.”

Dr. John L. Mish
Chief, Oriental Division
New York Public Library

“The books of Srila Prabhupada are to be treasured. No
one of whatever faith or philosophical persuasion who
reads these books with an open mind can fail to be
both moved and impressed.”

Dr. Garry Gelade
Professor of Psychology
Oxford University

[ACKET DESIGNED BY INDRA PRAMADA DASA
ILLUSTRATION BY JAGAT-KARANA DASI
 

Me
TEACHINGS OF
IORD KAPILA
The Son of Devahiti

 

LONG AGO, in an age we know about only from the epics
of ancient India, the great sage Kapila made His appearance
on earth—from the womb of the saintly Devahiiti. When her
husband left home to seek spiritual perfection in the forest,
Devahtiti implored her divine son Kapila to lead her to enlightenment. Lord Kapila then showed her the way of
Sankhya—the analytical pathway to a higher understanding
of the world, the self, and the ultimate source of everything.

Here the world’s most distinguished teacher of Vedic
philosophy and religion shows us just how relevant Lord
Kapila’s ancient teachings are to us today. Through the way
of Sankhya, as explained in this book, we learn about the
qualities of the spiritual master, the science of meditation, the
psychology of consciousness, the symptoms of the self-realized
person, the secret of transcendental knowledge, and the attainment of supreme liberation.
