Yoga for the Modern Age

THE PATH OF >

 

His Divine Grace

A.C. BHAKTIVEDANTA
SWAMI PRABHUPADA

FOUNDER-ACARYA OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY FOR KRISHNA CONSCIOUSNESS

 
 

Yoga
for the

Modern

a THE PATH OF

= PERFECTION

His Divine Grace

A.C. BHAKTIVEDANTA
SWAMI PRABHUPADA

 

7
BA TREST
THE PATH OF

of RFECTIOy

This is a book about yoga. It’s not
about what most people think yoga is. For
most of us, the term conjures in the mind
an image of some skinny, half-naked fellow contorted into a human pretzel, or
perhaps a room full of corpulent matrons
in black leotards, struggling to stand on
their heads in hopes of improving their
health, losing weight, or increasing their
waning sexual abilities. What has, in
modern times, been reduced to a commercially exploited technique of bodily
agility and pseudomeditation is, in reality, an ancient and profoundly transforming process of self-realization and
spiritual development.

The original science of yoga is expounded in the most celebrated of India’s
ancient spiritual classics, the Bhagavadgitd. The Gitd takes the form of an extraordinary dialogue between Lord Kgsna,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
His disciple Arjuna, a warrior. In what
has been described by one contemporary
psychologist as ‘ta remarkable psychotherapeutic session,” Lord Krsna reveals
to Arjuna how, through the practice of
yoga, one can live within this world yet
be transcendental to it, completely free
from illusion and anxiety, and attain
a state of “boundless transcendental
happiness.”

The Path of Perfection chronicles a
historic series of talks on the science of
yoga by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, one of the

(continued on back flap)
 

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada

Faunder-Acarya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
PLATE ONE

‘*Did Caitanya Mahaprabhu sit down to meditate? No, when
He appeared five hundred years ago in India, He was always dancing and chanting Hare Krsna. The spirit soul is naturally active.
How can we sit down silently and do nothing? It is not possible.
No one really wants to sit down and meditate. Why should we?
We're meant for positive activity, for recreation, for pleasure. In
Krsna consciousness, our recreation 1s dancing and chanting, and
when we get tired we take prasada, spiritual food. Is dancing difficult? Is chanting difficult? It is natural to enjoy music and dancing and palatable vegetarian foods. These are our recreations, and
this is our method of meditation. So this yoga system is not at
all laborious. It 1s stmply recreation, susukham—very happy. It
is natural, automatic, and spontaneous. It is our real life in the
spiritual world.” (pp. 8-9)

—,

—

ae
a)  —=—a
a

=e i>

c =) ~
Oa Ae AAS
~~. =© p , Pe ~~ T.) A

T nncdndadbatte

go

. 4
- ™ —

 

 

 
 

PLATE TWO

‘*Pleasure is the ultimate goal of yoga. This pleasure is not a
solitary affair; rather, it is experienced as part of the soul’s eternal
spiritual relationship with the Supreme Soul, Krsna. The yogi
seeking to attain this perfectional stage therefore meditates upon
Krsna’s associates in the spiritual world, the chief of whom is
Radha, His eternal consort and the personification of His spiritual
pleasure potency. The name Radha is derived from a Sanskrit
word meaning “‘to worship,’ and perfect yogis follow Her example
by constantly meditating upon Krsna and dedicating their energies
unto Him.” (pp. 9-10)

 
PLATE THREE

*‘One who has developed love for Krsna sees the Lord always
within his heart. At this stage, Lord Krsna never disappears from
the sight of the devotee, nor does the devotee ever lose sight of
the Lord. In the case of a yogi who sees the Lord as Paramatma,
the Supersoul within the heart, the same applies. Such a yog7 turns
into a pure devotee and cannot bear to live for a moment without
seeing the Lord within himself. This is the real process by which
we can see God. God is not our order supplier. We cannot demand, ‘Come and show Yourself.’ No, we first have to qualify
ourselves. Then we can see God at every moment and everywhere. A yogi who Is practicing meditation on the Supersoul sees
within himself the plenary portion of Krsna as Visnu—with four
hands, holding conchshell, wheel, club, and lotus flower.’ (p. 84)

 
 

 

PLATE FOUR

‘‘The yogi finds out where Lord Visnu is seated within his
heart, and when he finds this form there, he concentrates on Him.
The yogishould know that this Visnu is not different from Krsna.
Krsna in this form of Supersoul is situated in everyone’s heart.
Furthermore, there is no difference between the innumerable
Supersouls present in the innumerable hearts of living entities.
For example, there is only one sun in the sky, but this sun may be
reflected in millions of buckets of water. The sun is one, but it is
reflected countless times. According to the Vedas, the living entities are innumerable; there is no possibility of counting them.
Just as the sun can be reflected in countless buckets of water,
Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, can live in each and
everyone’s heart. It is this form on which the yogi concentrates. ”’
(pp. 86-87)

 
PLATE FIVE ‘‘Purification of consciousness is the purpose of the
yoga system. At death, the finer elements of our bodies (mind, intelligence, and ego), which, combined, are called consciousness, carry the
small particle of spirit soul to another body to suffer or enjoy, according
to one’s work.”” (p. /0/)

 

PLATE SIX ‘‘One’s thoughts and actions in one’s present life determine the type of body one will receive in one’s next life. If one likes to
cul meat, one may get the body of a tiger. One who its gluttonous may get
the body of a pig. If one takes pleasure in exposing one’s body, one may
wel the body of a tree, which must stand without clothing in all types of
weather. Or if one likes to sleep, one may get the body of a bear.”’
(pp. 101-2)
PLATE SEVEN

‘“The material world is like a vast ocean of death and suffering,
and the living beings floundering in this ocean are all controlled by
Durga, the personification of the Supreme Lord’s material energy.
Durga carries a trident, which represents the threefold miseries of
life— miseries caused by the mind and body, miseries caused by
other living creatures, and miseries caused by the forces of nature.
By practicing bhakti-yoga, pure devotion to Krsna, one can free
oneself from Durga’s superintendence and return to the spiritual
world.” (pp. 116-17)

 

 

 

 
PLATE EIGHT

*“ Hatha-yoga, when practiced according to the original instructions found in the Vedas of India, has little in common with the
watered-down yoga systems now taught in the West. The yogi was
required to leave his home and retire to the forest, where, seated
upon a deerskin mat, he would hold postures and meditate not for
fifteen minutes or half an hour but for years on end. He would discipline himself to endure all the physical discomforts caused by
the weather, and even when approached by dangerous jungle
animals such as the tiger, he would remain fearless. Finally, he
had to raise his soul on his life airs to the top of his skull and cause
the soul to leave the body at an astrologically auspicious moment. Today, no one can practice real hatha-yoga. Therefore, in
Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna recommends bhakti-yoga, which 1s
based on hearing and chanting the Hare Krsna mantra. Anyone,

even a child, can practice this simple, effective yoga system.”
(pp. 150-51)

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BOOKS by
His Divine Grace
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada

Bhagavad-gita As It Is

Srimad-Bhagavatam, cantos 1-10, (29 vols.)

Sri Caitanya-caritamrta (17 vols.)

Teachings of Lord Caitanya

The Nectar of Devotion

The Nectar of Instruction

Sri ISopanisad —

Easy Journey to Other Planets

Krsna Consciousness: The Topmost Yoga System

Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead (3 vols.)

Perfect Questions, Perfect Answers ,
Dialectical Spiritualism—A Vedic View of Western Philosophy
Teachings of Lord Kapila, the Son of Devahiti
Transcendental Teachings of Prahlad Maharaja

Teachings of Queen Kunti

Krsna, the Reservoir of Pleasure

The Science of Self-Realization

The Path of Perfection

Life Comes From Life

The Perfection of Yoga

’ Beyond Birth and Death

On the Way to Krsna

Geetar-gan (Bengali)

Vairdgya-vidya (Bengali)

Buddhi-yoga (Bengali)

Bhakti-ratna-boli (Bengali)

Raja-vidya: The King of Knowledge
Elevation to Krsna Consciousness

Krsna Consciousness: The Matchless Gift
Back to Godhead magazine (founder)

A complete catalog is available upon request.

Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
3764 Watseka Avenue
Los Angeles, California 90034

Yoga for the Modern Aége
THE PATH OR

His Divine Grace

A.C. BHAKTIVEDANTA
SWAMI PRABHUPADA

FOUNDER-ACARYA OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY FOR KRISHNA CONSCIOUSNESS

ab

THE BHAKTIVEDANTA BOOK TRUST
Los Angeles + New York * London + Paris + Frankfurt * Bombay
 

 

Readers interested in the subject matter of this book
are invited by the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
to visit any ISKCON center worldwide (see address list in back
of book) or to correspond with the Secretary:

 

International Society for Krishna Consciousness
3764 Watseka Avenue
Los Angeles, California 90034

 

 

 

 

First Printing, 1979: 175,000 copies
© 1979 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust

All Rights Reserved
Printed in the United States of America

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Bhaktivedanta, A C 1896-1977.
The path of perfection.

 

Bibliography: p.

Includes index.

1. Yoga— Addresses, essays, lectures. I. Title.
B132.Y6B53147 1979 294.5°43 79-9626
ISBN 0-89213-103-9

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Contents

Introduction

1. Yoga as Action
2. Mastering the Mind and Senses
3. Learning How to See God
4. Moderation in Yoga
5. Determination and Steadiness in Yoga
6. Perception of the Supersoul
7. Yoga for the Modern Age
8. Failure and Success in Yoga
9. Destination After Death
10. The Path of Perfection

Appendixes

The Author

References

Glossary

Guide to Sanskrit Pronunciation

General Index

vil

13
25
41
63
77
91
97
121
133

155
159
161
165
167
 

 

 

Introduction

When we see a book with a title like The Path of Perfection, we
May react with a bit of common skepticism: “‘Oh, another book
Claiming to give all the answers. One more do-it-yourself enlightenment scheme.”’ And certainly it seems that such skepticlam is justified nowadays. Our natural desire for ultimate
Meaning, happiness, enlightenment, liberation, and salvation has
become the most exploited commodity of the twentieth century,
Creating what one contemporary theologian termed a disastrous
“seduction of the spirit.” This seduction is, indeed, the most
tragic kind of exploitation. And the unfortunate consequence of
this exploitation is a kind of deadening cynicism that discourages
our search for self-fulfillment and a means to attain it.

The contemporary, thoughtful reader, weary of the many
Speculative, simplistic books cluttering the bookstore shelves,
offering instant formulas for psychological or spiritual salvation,
will find The Path of Perfection a welcome relief. Herein one will
find a clear, intriguing explanation of the philosophy and practice
of mankind’s oldest system of spiritual development—yoga.

Now, the word yoga may conjure up an image of some skinny
fakir contorted like a human pretzel, or perhaps a room full of corpulent matrons in black leotards struggling to stand on their heads
In hope of improving their health, losing weight, or increasing
their sexual powers. This is not what we mean by yoga. Here we
are referring to an ancient philosophy and meditational system
that has been practiced by millions throughout the ages. What has,
in modern times, been reduced to a commercially exploited technique of bodily agility and pseudomeditation was once a comprehensive and easily applied form of self-realization.

_ The Path of Perfection consists of a historic series of talks—
elaborations on a previously published commentary—by His Divine
Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (1896-1977) on
India's greatest Spiritual classic, the Bhagavad-gita. In these abeorbing talks, Srila Prabhupdda explores deeply the philosophy of
yoga as explained in the Sixth and Eighth Chapters of the Gita,
showing clearly how these timeless teachings apply to twentieth

vil.

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

viii THE PATH OF PERFECTION

century mankind. Srila Prabhupdda’s talks probe questions
concerning the nature of consciousness, techniques of meditation, Karma, death, reincarnation, and even spiritual ecstasy.
The Bhagavad-gita, described by one contemporary psychologist
as ‘‘a remarkable psychotherapeutic session,’’ appears to us in the

form of an extraordinary dialogue between Lord Krsna, the

Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His warrior disciple Arjuna.
Perplexed and confused about his identity and purpose, Arjuna
turns to Krsna, who reveals “‘the path of perfection’ to His able
student. The essence of Lord Krsna’s teachings is that one must
become a yogi, that is, one whose life is centered on the practice of

yoga. And what is yoga? The Sanskrit word yoga literally means
- “union,” and refers to the union, in love, between the individual
consciousness and the Supreme Consciousness, the self and
the Superself, the soul and God. Yoga is, indeed, ‘‘the path of
perfection,’ because it aims toward this most exalted human
attainment.

In the Bhagavad-gita, we discover four basic varieties of yoga
described. Karma-yoga refers to the process whereby one performs his work for God, without the selfish desire for personal
gain. Jiidna-yoga is the process of elevation to spiritual consciousness through the cultivation of philosophical knowledge. The
astanga-yoga system, of which the modern ‘‘hatha-yoga’’ is a
watered-down version, 1S a mechanical, meditative practice meant
to control the mind and senses and focus one’s concentration on
the Supreme. These three yoga systems culminate in bhakti-yoga,
the yoga of selfless, ecstatic, devotional love of God, Krsna. Lord
Krsna Himself states in the last verse of Chapter Six, ‘‘Of all yogis,
he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me
in yoga and is the highest of all.”

In The Path of Perfection, Srila Prabhupada offers a brilliant
summary of the methods of bhakti-yoga, revealing the universal
applicability of this simple but all-inclusive form of yoga. He
shows how even those who are entangled in the complexity and
chaos of modern materialistic life can begin an uncomplicated
practice which purifies the mind and puts one in touch with the
Supreme Consciousness.

 

 

Introduction ix

This, perhaps, was Srila Prabhupdda’s greatest contribution to
Our age. Srila Prabhupdda was an acknowledged master scholar of
India’s ancient spiritual culture and of its linguistic foundation,
the Sanskrit language. But he was not merely a textual scholar or a
philosopher or theologian engaged in the manufacture of interest
~ Ing philosophical or theological notions. He was a true spiritual
' genius who succeeded in bringing to life the essence of India’s

Universal spiritual wisdom in a form which is easy for twentieth

—Gentury man to understand and practice. This was the unique

genius which inspired the late prime minister of India, Sri Lal
Bahadur Shastri, to declare openly that the writings of Srila
Prabhupada ‘‘are a significant contribution to the salvation of
Mankind.” The transforming quality of Srila Prabhupada’s writIngs was also appreciated by sociologist Elwin H. Powell, who
commented on Srila Prabhudda’s best-selling edition of the

—Bhagavad-gita: ‘This transcendental mysticism from the East is

fiow takingroot in the ‘countercultures’ of the West and providing

for many a way out of the wilderness of a disintegrating civiliza
tion... . If truth is what works, there must be a kind of truth in the

agavad-gita As It Is, since those who follow its teachings display
a joyous serenity usually missing in the bleak and strident lives of
Contemporary people.”

—The Publishers

 
 

 

 

 

CHAPTER ONE

Yoga as Action

In the Sixth and Eighth Chapters of Bhagavad-gitd, Lord Sri
Krana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, explains that the
elghtfold yoga system is a means to control the mind and senses.
This method, however, is very difficult for people to perform, especially in this age of Kali, an age characterized by ignorance and
chaos.

Although this eightfold yoga system is particularly recomMended in the Sixth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, the Lord
emphasizes that the process of karma-yoga, action in Krsna coneclousness, is superior. In this world, everyone acts to maintain
his family, and everyone is working with a view to some selfinterest, or personal sense gratification, be it concentrated or extended. But to act perfectly is to act in Krsna consciousness, and
this means acting detached from the fruits of labor.

It is our duty to act in Krsna consciousness because we are conatltutionally parts and parcels of the Supreme. The parts of the
body work for the satisfaction of the entire body, not for the individual parts. The goal is the satisfaction of the complete whole.
Similarly, the living entity should act. for the satisfaction of the
supreme whole, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and not for
his own personal satisfaction. One who can do this is the perfect
éannyasi and the perfect yogi. In the first verse of the Sixth
Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, the chapter dealing with sankhya-yoga,
Bhagavan Sri Krsna states,

anasritah karma-phalam
karyam karma karoti yah
Sa sannyasi ca yogi ca
na niragnir na cakriyah

L

 
2 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

**One who is unattached to the fruits of his work and who works as
he is obligated is in the renounced order of life, and he is the true
mystic, not he who lights no fire and performs no work.” —

Sometimes sannyasis (renunciants) incorrectly think that they
have become liberated from all material engagements and
therefore no longer have to perform agni-hotra yajnas, or fire
sacrifices. This is a mistake. Certain yajfias (sacrifices) have to be
performed by everyone for purification. Since sannyasis are not
traditionally required to perform yajras, they sometimes think
that they can attain liberation by ceasing to perform the ritualistic
yajrias, but actually, unless one comes to the platform of Krsna
consciousness, there is no question of liberation. Those sannyasis
who cease to perform yajnas are in fact acting out of self-interest,
because their goal is to become one with the impersonal Brahman.
That is the ultimate goal of the impersonalists (Mayavadis), who
have one major goal or demand: to become one with the supreme
‘impersonal Being. The devotees have no such demands. They are
simply satisfied in’ serving Krsna for the satisfaction of Krsna.
They do not want anything in return. That is the characteristic of
pure devotion.

It was Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu who expressed this devotional attitude so succinctly:

na dhanam na janam na sundarim
kavitam va jagadisa kamaye

mama janmani janmanisvare
bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi

‘*O Almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor to
enjoy beautiful women. Nor do I want any number of followers.
What I want is only the causeless mercy of Your devotional service
in my life, birth after birth.’ (Siksdstaka 4) In essence, this is the
bhakti-yoga system. There are many examples of the pure devotional attitude. Once Lord Nrsimhadeva told Prahlada Maharaja,
*“My dear boy, you have suffered so much for Me. Whatever you
want, ask for it.”’ Being a pure devotee, Prahlada Maharaja refused
to ask for anything. He said, ‘‘My dear Master, I am not carrying

 

 

Yoga as Action 3

Out mercantile business with You. I will not accept any remuneration for my service.’’ This is the pure devotional attitude.

Yogis and jndnis are demanding to become one with the
Supreme because they have such bitter experience suffering the
material pangs. They want to become one with the Lord because
they are suffering in separation. A pure devotee, however, does
not experience this. Although separate from the Lord, he fully enJoys the service of the Lord in separation. The desire to become
One with the impersonal Brahman, or to merge with God, is certainly greater than any material desire, but this is not without selfInterest. Similarly, the mystic yogi who practices the yoga system
with half-open eyes, ceasing all material activities, desires some
Satisfaction for his personal self. Such yogis are desirous of material power, and that is their conception of the perfection of yoga.
Actually, this is not the perfection of yoga, but a materialistic
process.

If one practices the regulative principles of yoga, he can attain
eight kinds of perfection. He can become lighter than a cotton
swab. He can become heavier than a great stone. He can immediately get whatever he likes. Sometimes he can even create a
planet. Although rare, such powerful yogis actually exist.
Visvamitra Yogi wanted to beget a man from a palm tree. He was
thinking, ‘‘ Why should a man have to live so many months within
the womb of his mother? Why can’t he be produced just like a
fruit?’’ Thinking like this, Visvamitra Yogi produced men like
coconuts. Sometimes yogis are so powerful, they can perform such
acts, but these are all material powers. Ultimately such yogis are
vanquished, because they cannot retain these material powers indefinitely. Bhakta-yogis are not interested in such powers.

The bhakti-yogi, acting in Krsna consciousness, works for the
satisfaction of the whole without self-interest. A Krsna conscious
person does not desire self-satisfaction. Rather, his criterion of
success is the satisfaction of Krsna; therefore he is considered the
perfect sannyasi and the perfect yogi.

A pure devotee does not even want salvation. The salvationists
want to be saved from rebirth, and the voidists also want to put an
end to all material life. Caitanya Mahaprabhu, however, requested
 

4 , THE PATH OF PERFECTION

only devotional service to Lord Krsna, birth after birth, in other
words, Caitanya Mahaprabhu was prepared to endure material
miseries in one body after another. What, then, was Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s desire? He wanted to engage in God’s service, and
nothing more, for that is the real perfection of yoga.

Whether in the spiritual sky or the material sky, the individual
Spirit soul is constitutionally the same. It is said that he is one tenthousandth part of the tip of a hair. This means that our position is
that of a small particle. But spirit can expand. Just as we developa
material body in the material world, we develop a spiritual body in
the spiritual world. In the material world, expansion takes place
in contact with matter. In the spiritual world, this expansion is
spiritual.

Actually, the first lesson of Bhagavad-gita is, ‘‘I am spirit soul.
I am different from this body.’ I am a living force, but this material body is not a living force. It is dull matter, and it is activated
only because spiritual force is present. In the spiritual world,
everything is living force; there is no dead matter. There, the body
is totally spiritual. One may compare the spirit soul with oil and
the body with water. When oil is in water, there is a distinction,
and that distinction always remains. In the spiritual sky, there is
no question of oil being placed in water. There everything is spirit.

The impersonalists do not want to develop a body. They simply
want to remain spiritual particles, and that is their idea of happiness. But we bhakti-yogis (Vaisnavas) want to serve Krsna, and
therefore we require hands, legs, and all the other bodily parts. Indeed, we are given these bodies in order to serve Krsna. Just as we
develop a material body in our mother’s womb, we can similarly
develop a spiritual body in the spiritual world.

The spiritual body is developed through the practice of Krsna
consciousness. This material body is spiritualized by this bhaktiyoga process. If you place an iron within fire, the iron becomes so
hot that it also becomes fiery. When the iron is red hot, it acquires
all the qualities of fire. If you touch something with that iron, that
iron will act as fire. Similarly, although this body is material, it can
become spiritualized through Krsna consciousness and act as
spirit. Although copper is just a metal, as soon as it comes in con
 

 

Yoga as Action = 5

tact with electricity, it becomes electrified, and if you touch it, you
will receive an electric shock.

As soon as your body is spiritualized, material activity ceases.
Material activity means acting for sense gratification. As you become spiritualized, material demands dwindle until they become
nil. How is this possible? In order for an iron to act as fire, it must
femain constantly in contact with fire. In order for the material
body to become spiritualized, one must remain constantly in
Krsna consciousness. When this material body is fully engaged in
Spiritual activities, it becomes spiritual.

According to the Vedic system, the body of a high personality,
@ Sannyasi, is not burned but buried, because a sannyasi's body is
considered spiritual, having ceased to engage in material activities. If everyone in this world engages fully in Krsna consciousness and ceases to work for sense gratification, this entire world
will immediately become spiritual. Therefore it is necessary to
learn how to work for the satisfaction of Krsna. This requires a little time to understand. If something is used for Krsna’s satisfaction, it is spiritual. Since we are using microphones, typewriters,
@tc., in order to talk and write about Krsna, they become spiritualized. What is the difference between prasdada and ordinary food?
Some people may say, ‘‘What is this prasdda? We are eating the
game food. Why do you call it prasdda?’’ It is prasada because it
has been offered for Krsna’s satisfaction and has thus become
spiritualized.

In a higher sense, there is no matter at all. Everything is spiritual. Because Krsna is spiritual and matter is one of the energies of
Kesna, matter is also spiritual. Krsna is totally spiritual, and spirit
comes from spirit. However, because the living entities are misusing this energy—that is, using it for something other than
Krana’s purposes—it becomes materialized, and so we call it matter. The purpose of this Krsna consciousness movement is to
reapiritualize this energy. It is our purpose to respiritualize the
whole world, socially and politically. Of course, this may not be
possible, but it is our ideal. At least if we individually take up this
fespiritualization process, our lives become perfect.

In Bhagavad-gitd (9.22) Krsna says that He provides for His

 
 

 

 

 

6 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

devotees by giving them what they lack and preserving what they
have. People are very fond of saying that God helps those who
help themselves, but they do not understand that helping yourself
means putting yourself under Krsna’s protection. If one thinks,
*‘Oh, I can help myself. I can protect myself,’’ one is thinking
foolishly. As long as my finger is attached to my body, it is useful,
and I may spend thousands of dollars to preserve it. But if this
finger is cut off, it is useless and is thrown away. Similarly, we are
part and parcel of Krsna, and helping ourselves means putting
ourselves in our proper position as His parts and parcels. Otherwise we are only fit to be cast away. The finger can help itself only
when situated properly on the hand and working on behalf of the
entire body. If the finger thinks, ‘‘I will separate myself from this
body and simply help myself,’’ that finger will be cast away and
will die. As soon as we think, ‘‘I shall live independently of
Krsna,’ that is our spiritual death, and as soon as we engage in
Krsna’s service, as His part and parcel, that is our spiritual life.
Therefore, helping oneself means knowing one’s actual position
and working accordingly. It is not possible to help oneself without
knowing one’s position.

Service means activity, for when we serve someone, we are
acting. When we serve Krsna, we are preaching Krsna consciousness, or cooking, or cleansing the temple, or distributing books
about Krsna, or writing about Him, or shopping for foodstuff to
offer Him. There are so many ways to serve. Helping Krsna means
acting for Him, not sitting down in one place and artificially
meditating. Krsna consciousness means activity. Whatever assets
we have should be utilized for Krsna. That is the process of bhaktiyoga. Krsna has given us a mind, and we must utilize this mind to
think of Krsna. We have been given these hands, and we must use
them to wash the temple or cook for Krsna. We have been given
these legs, and we should use them to go to the temple of Krsna.
We have been given a nose, and we should use it to smell the
flowers that have been offered to Krsna. Through the process of
bhakti-yoga, we engage all these senses in the service of Krsna,
and in this way the senses are spiritualized.

In Bhagavad-gita, Arjuna was refusing to act, and Krsna was in
 

Yoga as Action 7

spiring him to engage in activity. The entire Bhagavad-gitd is an
Inspiration to work, to engage in Krsna consciousness, to act on
Krsna’s behalf. Krsna never tells Arjuna, ‘“‘My dear friend Arjuna,
don’t concern yourself with this war. Just sit down and meditate
Upon Me.”’ This is not the message of Bhagavad-gita. We are not
to refrain from all activity, but only from those activities that impede our consciousness of Krsna. Meditation means stopping all
nonsensical activity. Those who are advanced in Krsna consciousfiess are constantly working for Krsna.

A mother tells only her bad child to sit down and do nothing. If
a child can do nothing but disturb his mother, the mother says,
‘“*My dear child, just sit down here and keep quiet.”’ But if the
child can work nicely, the mother says, ‘‘My dear child, will you
please help me do this? Will you go over there and do that?”’ Sitting still in one place is just for those who do not know how to
work sensibly. As long as the child sits in one place, he does not
false havoc. Sitting still means negating nonsense; it is not positive activity. In negation, there is no life. Positive activities con
— Btitute life, and positive activity is the message of Bhagavad-gitd.

Spiritual life is not ‘Don’t do this.’’ Spiritual life is ‘‘Do this!’ In
order to act properly, there are certain things that one must know
not to do; therefore certain activities are forbidden. The whole
Bhagavad-gita, however, is ‘‘do.’’ Krsna says, ‘‘Fight for Me.” At
the beginning of Bhagavad-gitd, when Arjuna told Krsna, “‘I will
not fight,’’ Sri Krsna said,

kutas tva kasmalam idam
visame Samupasthitam —

anarya-justam asvargyam
akirti-karam arjuna

‘““My dear Arjuna, how have these impurities come upon you?
They are not at all befitting a man who knows the progressive
values of life. They lead not to higher planets, but to infamy.”’
(Bg. 2.2) Krsna directly tells Arjuna that he is speaking like a nonAryan—that is, like one who does not know the spiritual values of
life. So Krsna consciousness does not mean sitting down idly.
 

8 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Krsna Himself does not sit down idly. All His pastimes are
filled with activity. When we go to the spiritual world, we will see
that Krsna is always engaged in dancing, eating, and enjoying. He
does not sit down to meditate. Is there any account of the gopis
meditating? Did Caitanya Mahaprabhu sit down to meditate? No,
He was always dancing and chanting Hare Krsna. The spirit soul is
naturally active. How can we sit down silently and do nothing? It
is not possible. Therefore, after Sri Krsna outlined the sankhyayoga system in the Sixth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, Arjuna frankly
said,

yo ‘yam yogas tvaya proktah
samyena madhusudana
- etasyaham na pasyami
cancalatvat sthitim sthiram

‘‘O Madhusiidana [Krsna], the system of yoga which You have
Summarized appears impractical and unendurable to me, for the
mind is restless and unsteady.”’ (Bg. 6.33) Although Arjuna was
highly elevated and was Krsna’s intimate friend, he immediately
refused to take up this sankhya-yoga system. In essence, he said,
‘*It is not possible for me.’’ How could it have been possible? Ar-Juna was a warrior, a householder, and he wanted a kingdom.
What time did he have for meditation? He flatly refused to practice this type of meditational yoga, saying that the mind is as difficult to control as the wind (Bg. 6.34). That is a fact. It is not
possible to control the mind artificially; therefore we must engage
the mind in Krsna consciousness. Then it is controlled. If Arjuna
found this process more difficult than controlling the wind, then
what of us? After all, Arjuna was not an ordinary man. He was
personally talking with the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna, and he
proclaimed the mind to be like a great wind. How can we control
the wind? We can control the mind only by fixing it on Krsna’s
lotus feet. That is the perfection of meditation.

No one really wants to sit down and meditate. Why should we?
We’re meant for positive activity, for recreation, for pleasure. In
Krsna consciousness, our recreation is dancing and chanting, and

 

 

Yoga as Action 9

when we get tired, we take prasdda. Is dancing difficult? Is chanting difficult? We don’t charge anything to dance in the temple. If
you go to a ballroom, you have to pay to enter, but we do not
Charge. It is natural to enjoy music and dancing and palatable
foods. These are our recreations, and this is our method of
Meditation. So this yoga system is not at all laborious. It is simply
recreation, susukham. It is stated in the Ninth Chapter of
Bhagavad-gita (9.2) that this yoga is susukham—very happy. “‘It is
everlasting, and it is joyfully performed.”’ It is natural, automatic,
and spontaneous. It is our real life in the spiritual world.

In Vaikuntha, the spiritual world, there is no anxiety.
Vaikuntha means ‘‘freedom from anxiety,’ and in Vaikuntha the
liberated souls are always dancing, chanting, and taking prasdda.
There are no factories, hard work, or technical institutions. There
is no need for these artificial things. In Veddnta-suitra it is stated,
G@nandamayo ‘bhydsat: God is dnandamaya, full of bliss and
pleasure. Since we are part and parcel of God, we also possess
these same qualities. So the goal of our yoga process is to join with
the supreme dnandamaya, Sri Krsna, to join His dance party. Then
we will be actually happy.

On this earth we are trying to be happy artificially and are
therefore frustrated. Once we are situated in Krsna consciousness,
we will revive our original position and become simply joyful.
Since our actual nature is dnandamaya, blissful, we are always
searching for happiness. In the cities we are inundated with advertlseements. Restaurants, bars, nightclubs, and dance halls are alWays announcing, “Come on, here is ananda. Here is pleasure.”
That is because everyone is searching for dnanda, pleasure. Our
society for Krsna consciousness is also announcing, ‘‘Here is
G@nanda,” but our standard of pleasure is very different. In any
case, the goal—pleasure—is the same.

Most people are hunting for pleasure on the gross material
platform. The more advanced search for pleasure in speculation,
philosophy, poetry, or art. The bhakti-yogi, however, searches for
pleasure on the transcendental platform, and that is his only business. Why are people working so hard all day? They are thinking,
“Tonight I shall enjoy. Tonight I will associate with this girl or

 
10 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

with my wife.’” Thus people are going to so much trouble to acquire a little pleasure. Pleasure is the ultimate goal, but unfortunately, under illusion, people do not know where real pleasure
is to be found. Real pleasure exists eternally in the transcendental
form of Krsna. : }

Perhaps you have seen pictures of Krsna, and if so, you have
noticed that Krsna is always jolly. If you join His society, you will
also become jolly. Have you ever seen pictures of Krsna working
with a machine? Have you ever seen pictures of Krsna smoking?
No, He is dy nature full of pleasure, and if you unfold yourself in
that way, you will also find pleasure. Pleasure cannot be found
artificially.

ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis

— tabhir ya eva nija-riipataya kalabhih

goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhuto
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami

‘I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, residing in His own
realm, Goloka, with Radha, resembling His own spiritual figure,
the embodiment of the ecstatic potency possessed of the sixtyfour artistic activities, in the company of Her confidantes
(sahkhis), embodiments of the extensions of Her bodily form,
permeated and vitalized by His ever-blissful spiritual rasa.”
(Brahma-samhita §.37)

The word rasa means “‘taste,”’ or “‘mellow.’’ We enjoy sweets
or candy because of their taste. Everyone is trying to enjoy some
taste, and we want to enjoy sex because there 1s some taste there.
That is called adi taste. Material tastes are different because they
are tasted and quickly finished. Material tastes last only a few
minutes. You may take a piece of candy, taste it, and say, *“‘Oh,
that is very nice,’’ but you have to taste another in order to continue the enjoyment. Material taste is not unlimited, but real taste
is without end. Spiritual taste cannot be forgotten; it goes on increasing. Anandambudhi-vardhanam. Caitanya Mahaprabhu says,
‘This taste is always increasing.’’ Spiritual taste is like the ocean
in the sense that it is very great. The Pacific Ocean is always toss
 

 

Yoga as Action , 11

ing, but it is not increasing. By God’s order, the ocean does not
extend beyond its limit, and if it extends, there is havoc. Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu says that there is another ocean, an ocean
of transcendental bliss, an ocean that is always increasing. Anandambudhi-vardhanam pratipadam purnamrtasvadanaml sarvatmaSnapanam param vijayate sri-krsna-sankirtanam. By chanting Hare
Krsna, our pleasure potency increases more and more.

One who has realized Sri Krsna is always living in Vrndavana,
Vaikuntha. Although a devotee may seem to be living in some place far from Vrndavana, he is always living in Vrndavana, be- |
Cause he knows that Krsna is present everywhere, even within the
atom. The Supreme Lord is bigger than the biggest and smaller
than the smallest. Once we are fully realized and established in
Krsna consciousness, we never lose sight of Krsna, and our bliss is
always increasing. This is the true yoga system, bhakti-yoga, aS expounded by Lord Sri Krsna Himself in Bhagavad-gita.

Xn
 

 

 

 

CHAPTER TWO

Mastering the Mind and Senses

yam sannyasam iti prahur
yogam tam viddhi pandava

na hy asannyasta-sankalpo
yogt bhavati kascana

“What is called renunciation is the same as yoga, or linking
Oneself with the Supreme, for no one can become a yogi unless he
fenounces the desire for sense gratification.”’ (Bg.6.2)

This is the real purpose of the practice of yoga. The word yoga
means “‘to join.’’ Although we are naturally part and parcel of the
Supreme, in our conditioned state we are now separated. Because
of our separation, we are reluctant to understand God and to
speak of our relationship with Him and are even inclined to think
of such discussion as a waste of time. In a church or in a Krsna
consciousness temple, we speak of God, but people in general are
not very interested. They think it is a waste of time, a kind of
recreation in the name of spiritual advancement, and they believe
that this time could be better used to earn money or enjoy themselves in a nightclub or restaurant.

Therefore, it is due to sense enjoyment that we are not attracted to God, and therefore it is said that those who are addicted
to sense enjoyment cannot become yogis—that is, they are not eligible to participate in the yoga system. One cannot advance in any

13.
 

 

14 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

yoga system if he partakes in sense gratification and then sits down
to try to meditate. This is just a colossal hoax. Such contradictory activity has no meaning. First of all, yoga means controlling the senses—yama-niyama. There are eight stages of yoga—
yama, niyama, asana, dhyana, dharana, pranayama, pratyahara,
and samadhi.

In this Sixth Chapter, in which the Lord speaks of the sankhya-.

yoga system, He states from the very beginning that one cannot
become a yogi unless one renounces the desire for sense gratification. Therefore, if one indulges his senses, he cannot be accepted
as a yogi. Yoga demands strict celibacy. In the yoga system, there is
no sex life. If one indulges in sex, he cannot be a yogi. Many socalled yogis come from India to America and say, ‘Yes, you can
do whatever you like. You can have as much sex as you like. Just
meditate. I will give you some mantra, and you will give me some
money.” This is all nonsense. According to the authoritative
statements of Sri Krsna, one cannot become a yogi unless he renounces the desire for sense gratification. This is explicitly stated
as the first condition for yoga practice.

aruruksor muner yogam
karma karanam ucyate

yogarudhasya tasyaiva
Samah ka@ranam ucyate

‘*For one who is a neophyte in the eightfold yoga system, work is
said to be the means; and for one who has already attained to yoga,
cessation of all material activities is said to be the means.”
(Bg. 6.3) According to this verse, there are those who are attempting to reach the perfectional stage and those who have already attained that stage. As long as one is not situated on the perfectional
platform, he must engage in so many works. In the West, there
are many yoga societies attempting to practice the @sana system,
and therefore they practice sitting in different postures. That may
help, but it is only a process by which one can attain the real platform. The real yoga system, in its perfectional stage, is far
different from these bodily gymnastics.

 

 

Mastering the Mind and Senses 15

It is important to understand, however, that from the beginning, a Krsna conscious person is situated on the platform of
meditation because he is always thinking of Krsna. Being constantly engaged in the service of Krsna, he is considered to have
ceased all material activities.

yada hi nendriyarthesu
na karmasy anusajjate

sarva-sankalpa-sannyasi
yogarudhas tadocyate

‘*A person is said to have attained to yoga when, having renounced all material desires, he neither acts for sense gratification
nor engages in fruitive activities.’ (Bg. 6.4)

This is actually the perfectional stage of yoga, and one who has
attained this stage is said to have attained to yoga. This is to say
that he has connected, joined, or linked himself with the supreme
whole. If a part is disconnected from a machine, it serves no function, but as soon as it is properly attached to the machine, it works
properly and carries out its different functions. That is the meaning of yoga—joining with the supreme whole, serving in conjunction with the total machine. Presently we are disconnected, and
Our material fruitive activities are simply a waste of time. One who
@ngages in such activity is described in Bhagavad-gita as a
mudha—that is, a rascal. Although one may earn thousands of dollars daily and be an important businessman, he is described in
Bhagavad-gitd as a midha, rascal, because he is just wasting his
time in eating, sleeping, defending, and mating.

People do not stop to consider that they are actually working
very hard for nothing. One who earns millions of dollars cannot
really eat much more than a man who makes ten dollars. A man
who earns millions of dollars cannot mate with millions of women.
That is not within his power. His mating power is the same as one
who earns ten dollars, just as his power of eating is the same. This
ls to say that our power of enjoyment is limited. One should
therefore think, ‘‘My enjoyment is the same as that of the man
who is earning ten dollars daily. So why am I working so hard to

 
16 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

earn millions of dollars? Why am I wasting my energy? I should
engage my time and energy in understanding God. That is the
purpose of life.’ If one has no economic problems, he has sufficient time to understand Krsna consciousness. If he wastes this
precious time, he 1s called a mudha, a rascal or an ass.

According to the preceding verse, a person is said to have attained yoga when he has renounced all material desires. Once we
are situated perfectly in yoga, we are satisfied. We no longer experience material desires. We no longer act for sense gratification
or engage in fruitive activity. When we speak of ‘‘fruitive activity,’ we refer to activities carried out for the purpose of sense
gratification. That is, we are earning money in order to gratify our
senses. If one is virtuous, he engages in pious activities—he donates money to charities, opens hospitals, schools, etc. Although
these are certainly virtuous activities, they are ultimately meant
for sense gratification. How is this? If I donate to an educational
institution, for instance, I will receive good educational facilities
and will become highly educated in my next life. Being thus educated, I will attain a good position and will acquire a good amount
of money. Then how will I utilize this money? For sense gratification. Thus these virtuous and fruitive activities form a kind of
cycle.

We often hear the expression ‘‘a better standard of life,’ but
what does this mean? It is said that the standard of life in America
is superior to that in India, but in both countries there is eating,
sleeping, defending, and mating. Of course, in America the
quality of food may be better, but the eating process is there. A
superior standard of life does not mean superior spiritual realization. It just means better eating, sleeping, mating, and defending.
This is called fruitive activity, and it is based on sense gratification.

Yoga has nothing to do with sense gratification or fruitive activity. Yoga means connecting with the Supreme. Dhruva Maharaja underwent severe austerities in order to see God, and
when he finally saw God, he said, sva@min krtartho ’smi varam na
yace: ‘‘My dear Lord, I am now fully satisfied. I am not asking for
anything more. I do not want any further benediction from You.”’
Why didn’t Dhruva Maharaja ask for benedictions? What is a

 

Mastering the Mind and Senses 17

‘benediction’? Generally, benediction means receiving a great
kingdom, a beautiful wife, palatable food, and so forth, but when
One is actually connected with God, he does not want such
**benedictions.”’ He is fully satisfied. Sva@min krtartho ’smi varam
na yace.

Actually, Dhruva Maharaja initially searched for God in order
to attain his father’s kingdom. Dhruva Maharaja’s mother was rejected by his father, and his stepmother resented his sitting on his
father’s lap. Indeed, she forbade him to sit on his father’s lap because Dhruva Maharaja was not born in her womb. Although only
five years old, Dhruva Maharaja was a ksatriya, and he took this as
@ great insult. Going to his own mother, he said, ‘“‘Mother, my
stepmother has insulted me by forbidding me to sit on my father’s
lap.” Dhruva Maharaja then started to cry, and his mother said,
‘*My dear boy, what can I do? Your father loves your stepmother
more than he loves me. I can do nothing.’’ Dhruva Maharaja then
said, ‘‘But I want my father’s kingdom. Tell me how I can get it.”’
‘My dear boy,”’ his mother said, ‘‘if Krsna, God, blesses you, you

Can get it.”’ ‘“Where is God?’”’ Dhruva Maharaja asked. ‘‘Oh, it is

said that God is in the forest,”’ his mother said. ‘‘Great sages go to
the forest to search for God.”’ |

Hearing this, Dhruva Maharaja went directly to the forest and
began to perform severe penances. Finally he saw God, and when
he saw Him, he no longer desired his father’s kingdom. Instead,
he said, ‘‘My dear Lord, I was searching for some pebbles, but instead I have found valuable jewels. I no longer care for my father’s
kingdom. Now I am fully satisfied.’>’ When one is actually connected with God, he is totally satisfied. His satisfaction is infinitely
greater than so-called enjoyment in this material world. That is the
satisfaction resulting from God realization, and that is the perfectlon of yoga.

When a person is fully engaged in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord, he is pleased in himself, and thus he is no
longer engaged in sense gratification or in fruitive activities.
Otherwise, one must be engaged in sense gratification, since one
Cannot live without engagement. It is impossible to cease all activity. As stated before, it is our nature as living entities to act. It is
 

 

18 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

said, “‘An idle mind is the devil’s workshop.”’ If we have no Krsna
conscious engagement, we will engage in sense gratification or
fruitive activity. If a child is not trained or educated, he becomes
spoiled. If one does not practice the yoga system, if he does not attempt to control his senses by the yoga process, he will engage his
senses in their own gratification. When one is gratifying his
senses, there is no question of practicing yoga.

Without Krsna consciousness, one must be always seeking
self-centered or extended selfish activities. But a Krsna conscious
person can do everything for the satisfaction of Krsna and thereby
be perfectly detached from sense gratification. One who has not
realized Krsna must mechanically try to escape material desires
before being elevated to the top rung of the yoga ladder.

One may compare the yoga system to a stepladder. One yogi
may be situated on the fifth step, another yogi may be on the
fiftieth step and yet another on the five-hundredth step. The purpose, of course, is to reach the top. Although the entire ladder
may be called the yoga system, one who is on the fifth step is not
equal to one who is higher up. In Bhagavad-gita, Sri Krsna delineates a number of yoga systems—karma-yoga, jnana-yoga, dhyanayoga, and bhakti-yoga. All of these systems are connected with
God, Krsna, just as the entire ladder is connected to the topmost

floor. This is not to say that everyone practicing the yoga system is

Situated on the topmost floor; only he who is in full Krsna consciousness is so situated. Others are situated on different steps of
the yogic ladder.

uddhared atmanatmanam
natmanam avasdadayet

atmaiva hy atmano bandhur |
Gtmaiva ripur atmanah

*‘A man must elevate himself by his own mind, not degrade himself. The mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy
as well.”’ (Bg. 6.5) The word dtmd denotes body, mind, and soul—
depending on different circumstances. In the yoga system, the
mind and the conditioned soul are especially important. Since the

 

 

Mastering the Mind and Senses 19

mind is the central point of yoga practice, dtmd refers here to the
mind. The purpose of the yoga system is to control the mind and
to draw it away from attachment to sense objects. It is stressed
herein that the mind must be so trained that it can deliver the conditioned soul from the mire of nescience.

In the astdiga-yoga system, these eightfold yogas—dhyana,
dhdrand, etc.—are meant to control the mind. Sri Krsna explicitly
states that a man must utilize his mind to elevate himself. Unless
One can control the mind, there is no question of elevation. The
body is like a chariot, and the mind is the driver. If you tell your
driver, ‘‘Please take me to the Krsnatemple,”’ the driver will take
you there, but if you tell him, ‘‘Please take me to that liquor
house,”’ you will go there. It is the driver’s business to take you
wherever you like. If you can control the driver, he will take you’
where you should go, but if not, he will ultimately take you
wherever he likes. If you have no control over your driver, your
driver is your enemy, but if he acts according to your orders, he is
your friend.

The yoga system is meant to control the mind in such a way
that the mind will act as your friend. Sometimes the mind acts as a
friend and sometimes as an enemy. Because we are part and parcel
of the Supreme, who has infinite independence, we have minute,
or finite, independence. It is the mind that is controlling that independence, and therefore he may either take us to the Krsna temple or to some nightclub.

It is the purpose of this Krsna consciousness movement to fix
the mind on Krsna. When the mind is so fixed, he cannot do anything but act as our friend. He has no scope to act any other way.
As soon as Krsna is seated in the mind, there is light, just as when
the sun is in the sky, darkness is vanquished. Krsna is just like the
gun, and when He is present, there is no scope for darkness. If we
keep Krsna on our mind, the darkness of madyd will never be able
to enter. Keeping the mind fixed on Krsna is the perfection of
yoga. If the mind is strongly fixed on the Supreme, it will not allow
any nonsense to enter, and there will be no falldown. If the mind
is strong, the driver is strong, and we may go wherever we may
desire. The entire yoga system is meant to make the mind strong,

 
20 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

to make it incapable of deviating from the Supreme.

Sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh. One should fix his mind
on Krsna, just as Ambarisa Maharaja did when he had a fight with
a great asfanga-yogi named Durvasa Muni. Since Ambarisa
Maharaja was a householder, he was a pounds-shillings man. This
means that he had to take into account pounds, shillings, and sixpence, or dollars and cents. Apart from being a householder,
Maharaja Ambarisa was also a great king and devotee. Durvasa
Muni was a great yogi who happened to be very envious of
Maharaja Ambarisa. Durvasa Muni was thinking, ‘‘I am a great
yogi, and I can travel in space. This man is an ordinary king, and he
does not possess such yogic powers. Still, people pay him more
honor. Why is this? I will teach him a good lesson.’” Durvasa
Muni then proceeded to pick a quarrel with Maharaja Ambarisa,
but because the king was always thinking of Krsna, he managed to
defeat this great yogi. Durvasé Muni was consequently directed by
Narayana to take shelter at the feet of Maharaja Ambarisa. Durvasa Muni was such a perfect yogithat within a year he could travel
throughout the material universe and also penetrate the spiritual
universe. Indeed, he went directly to the abode of God,
Vaikuntha, and saw the Personality of Godhead Himself. Yet Durvasa Muni was so weak that he had to return to earth and fall at the
feet of Maharaja Ambarisa. Maharaja Ambarisa was an ordinary
king, but his one great qualification was that he was always thinking of Krsna. Thus his mind was always controlled, and he was
situated at the highest perfectional level of yoga. We also can very
easily control the mind by keeping it fixed on the lotus feet of
Krsna within. Simply by thinking of Krsna, we become victorious
conquerors, topmost yogis.

Yoga indriya-samyamah. The yoga system is meant to control
the senses, and since the mind is above the senses, if we can control the mind, our senses are automatically controlled. The tongue
may want to eat something improper, but if the mind is strong, it
can say, ‘“‘No. You cannot eat this. You can only eat krsnaprasada.”’ In this way the tongue, as well as all the other senses,
can be controlled by the mind. /ndriydni pardny ahur indriyebhyah

 

Mastering the Mind and Senses 21

param manah. The material body consists of the senses, and consequently the body’s activities are sensual activities. However,
above the senses is the mind, and above the mind ts the intelligence, and above the intelligence is the spirit soul. If one is on the
Spiritual platform, his intelligence, mind, and senses are all spiritualized. The purpose of this Krsna consciousness process Is to actualize the spiritualization of senses, mind, and intelligence. The
Spirit soul 1s superior to all, but because he is sleeping, he has
given power of attorney to the fickle mind. However, when the
soul is awakened, he is once again master, and the servile mind
Cannot act improperly. Once we are awakened in Krsna consciousness, the intelligence, mind, and senses cannot act nonsensically.
They must act in accordance with the dictations of the spirit soul.
That is spiritualization and purification. Hrsikena hrsikesasevanam bhaktir ucyate. We must serve the master of the senses
with the senses. The Supreme Lord is called Hrsikesa, which
means that He is the original controller of the senses, just as a king
is the original controHer of all the activities of a state, and the
Citizens are secondary controllers.

Bhakti means acting spiritually in accordance with the desires
of Hrsikesa. How can we act? Since we must act with our senses,
we must spiritualize our senses 1n order to act properly. As stated

_ before, sitting in silent meditation means stopping undesirable ac
tivity, but acting in Krsna consciousness is transcendental. The
cessation of nonsensical action is not in itself perfection. We must
act perfectly. Unless we train our senses to act in accordance with
Hrsikesa, the master of the senses, our senses will again engage in
undesirable activities, and we will fall down. Therefore we must
@ngage the senses in action for Krsna and in this way remain
firmly fixed in Krsna consciousness.

In material existence one is subjected to the influence of the
mind and the senses. In fact, the pure soul is entangled in the material world because of the mind’s ego, which desires to lord it
over material nature. Therefore the mind should be trained so that
It will not be attracted by the glitter of material nature, and in this
way the conditioned soul may be saved. One should not degrade

 
 

22 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

oneself by attraction to sense objects. The more one is attracted by
sense objects, the more one becomes entangled in material existence. The best way to disentangle oneself is to always engage the
mind in Krsna consciousness. The word hi in verse 5, Chapter Six
(Bhagavad-gita), is used to emphasize this point—namely, that
one must do this. It 1s also said,

mana eva manusyanam
karanam bandha-moksayoh

bandhaya visayasangi
muktyai nirvisayam manah

**For man, mind is the cause of bondage and mind is the cause of
liberation. Mind absorbed in sense objects is the cause of bondage,
and mind detached from the sense objects is the cause of liberation.” (Visnu Purdna 6.7.28) The mind which is always engaged in
Krsna consciousness is the cause of supreme liberation. When the
mind is thus engaged in Krsna consciousness, there is no chance
of its being engaged in maya consciousness. In Krsna consciousness, we remain in the sunlight, and there is no chance of our
being obscured by darkness.

Because we have freedom, or liberty, we can stay within a dark
. foom or go out into the broad daylight. That is our choice. Darkness can be eradicated by light, but light cannot be covered by
darkness. If we are in a dark room and someone brings in a lamp,
the darkness is vanquished. But we cannot take darkness into the
sunlight. It is not possible. The darkness will simply fade away.
Krsna surya-sama maya haya andhakara. Krsna is like sunlight,
and maya is like darkness. So how can darkness exist in sunlight?
If we always keep ourselves in the sunlight, darkness will fail to act
upon us. This is the whole philosophy of Krsna consciousness: always engage in Krsna conscious activities, and madyd will be dissipated, just as darkness is dissipated when there is light. This is
stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.7.4):

bhakti-yogena manasi
samyak pranihite ’male

 

Mastering the Mind and Senses 23

apasyat purusam purnam
mayam ca tad-apasrayam

‘“When the sage Vydsadeva, under the instruction of his spiritual
master, Narada, fixed his mind, perfectly engaging it by linking it
in devotional service (bhakti-yoga) without any tinge of materialism, Vydsadeva saw the Absolute Personality of Godhead, along
with His external energy, which was under full control.”’

The word manasi refers to the mind. When one is enlightened
in bhakti-yoga, the mind becomes completely freed from all
contamination (samyak pranihite ’male). When Vyasa saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he saw maya in the background
(mdydam ca tad-apdsrayam). Whenever there is light, there is also
the possibility of darkness being present. That is, darkness is the
Other side of light, or darkness is under the shelter of light, just as
if I hold my hand up to the light, the top part of my hand will be in
light, and the bottom part will be shaded. In other words, one side
\s light and the other darkness. When Vydsadeva saw Krsna, the
Supreme Lord, he also saw maya, darkness, under His shelter.

And what is this maya? This is explained in the next verse of
Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.7.5): |

yaya sammohito jiva
atmanam tri-gunatmakam

paro ‘pi manute ‘nartham
tat-krtam cabhipadyate

"Due to the external energy, the living entity, although transcendental to the three modes of material nature, thinks of himself asa
Material product and thus undergoes the reactions of material
miseries.” Thus the illusory energy has temporarily covered the
GOnditioned souls. And who are these conditioned souls? Although finite, the conditioned spirit souls are as full of light as
Krena. The problem is that the conditioned soul identifies himself
with this material world. This is called illusion, false indentification with matter. Although the individual spirit soul is transcendental, he engages in improper activities under the dictation of
24 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

maya, and this brings about his conditioning or false indentification. This is very elaborately explained in the Seventh Chapter,
First Canto, of Srimad-Bhdgavatam.

In conclusion, our actual position is that of spiritual sparks, full
of light. Now we are temporarily covered by this illusory energy,
maya, which is dictating to us. Acting under the influence of maya,
we are becoming more and more entangled in the material energy.
The yoga system is meant to disentangle us, and the perfection of
yoga iS Krsna consciousness. Thus Krsna consciousness is the
most effective means by which we can disentangle ourselves from
the influence of the material energy.

 

CHAPTER THREE

Learning How to See God

bandhur atmatmanas tasya
yenatmaivatmana jitah

anatmanas tu Satrutve
vartetatmaiva Satruvat

‘For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of
friends; but for one who has failed to do so, his very mind will be
the greatest enemy.”’ (Bg. 6.6) |

The purpose of the yoga system is to make the mind into a
(riend instead of an enemy. In material contact, the mind is in a
kind of drunken condition. As stated in Caitanya-caritamrta
(Madhya-lila 20.117), .

krsna bhuli’ sei jiva—anadi-bahirmukha
ataeva maya tare deya samsara-duhkha

Forgetting Krsna, the living entity has been attracted by the
Lord’s external feature from time immemorial. Therefore the illusory energy (maya) gives him all kinds of misery in his material
existence.’’ The living entity is constitutionally spirit soul, part
and parcel of the Supreme Lord. As soon as the mind is contaminated, the living entity, because he has a little independence,
rebels. In this state, the mind dictates, ‘‘Why should I serve
Krena? I am God.”’ Thus one labors under a false impression, and
his life is spoiled. We try to conquer many things—even emplres—but if we fail to conquer the mind, we are failures even if
we manage to conquer an empire. Even though emperors, we will
have within us our greatest enemy—our own mind.

25.
26 | THE PATH OF PERFECTION

jitatmanah prasantasya
paramatma samahitah

Sitosna-sukha-duhkhesu
tatha manapamanayoh

‘*For one who has conquered the mind, the Supersoul ts already
reached, for he has attained tranquillity. To such a man happiness
and distress, heat and cold, honor and dishonor are all the same.”’
(Bg. 6.7)

Actually, every living entity is intended to abide by the dictation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is seated in
everyone's heart as Paramatma. When the mind is misled by the
external illusory energy, one becomes entangled in material activities. Therefore, aS soon as one’s mind is controlled through
one of the yoga systems, one is to be considered as having already
reached the destination. One has to abide by superior dictation.
When the mind is fixed on the superior nature, he has no alternative but to follow the dictation of the Supreme. The mind
must admit some superior dictation and follow it. When the mind
is controlled, one automatically follows the dictation of the
Paramatma, or Supersoul. Because this transcendental position is
at once achieved by one who is in Krsna consciousness, the devotee of the Lord is unaffected by the dualities of material existence—distress and happiness, cold and heat, etc. This state is
called samadhi, or absorption in the Supreme.

jnana-vijnana-trptatma
kuta-stho vijitendriyah

yukta ity ucyate yogi
sama-lostrasma-kafcanah

‘*A person is said to be established in self-realization and is called
a yogi [or mystic] when he is fully satisfied by virtue of acquired
knowledge and realization. Such a person is situated in transcendence and is self-controlled. He sees everything—whether it be
pebbles, stones, or gold—as the same.”” (Bg. 6.8)

 

| Learning How to See God 27

Book knowledge without realization of the Supreme Truth is
useless. This is stated as follows:

atah sri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
svayam eva sphuraty adah

‘*No one can understand the transcendental nature of the name,
form, quality, and pastimes of Sri Krsna through his materially
contaminated senses. Only when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental service to the Lord are the transcendental
name, form, quality, and pastimes of the Lord revealed to him.”’
(Padma Purana) |

There are men in the modes of goodness, passion, and ignorance, and to reclaim all these conditioned souls, there are eighteen Puranas. Six Puranas are meant for those in the mode of
goodness, six for those in the mode of passion, and six for those in
the mode of ignorance. The Padma Purana is written for those in
the mode of goodness. Because there are many different types of
men, there are many different Vedic rituals. In the Vedic
literatures there are descriptions of rituals and ceremonies in
which a goat may be sacrificed in the presence of the goddess Kali.
This is described in the Markandeya Purana, but this Purana ismeant for the instruction of those in the mode of ignorance.

It is very difficult for one to give up his attachments all at once.
If one is addicted to meat-eating and is suddenly told that he must
not eat meat, he cannot do so. If one is attached to drinking liquor
and is suddenly told that liquor is no good, he cannot accept this
advice. Therefore, in the Purdnas we find certain instructions that
say in essence, “‘All right, if you want to eat meat, just worship the
goddess Kali and sacrifice a goat for her. Only then can you eat
meat. You cannot eat meat just by purchasing it from the butcher
shop. No, there must be sacrifice or restriction.”’ In order to
sacrifice a goat to the goddess Kali, one must make arrangements

| for a certain date and utilize certain paraphernalia. That type of

 
28 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

puja, or worship, is allowed on the night of the dark moon, which
means once a month. There are also certain mantras to be chanted
when the goat is sacrificed. The goat is told, ‘‘Your life is being
sacrificed before the goddess Kali; you will therefore be im- mediately promoted to the human form.’’ Generally, in order to
attain the human form, a living entity has to pass through many
species of life on the evolutionary scale, but if a goat is sacrificed
to the goddess Kali, he is immediately promoted to the human
form. The mantra also says, ‘‘You have the right to kill this man
who is sacrificing you.’ The word mamsa indicates that in his next
birth, the goat will eat the flesh of the man who is presently
sacrificing him. This in itself should bring the goat-eater to his
senses. He should consider, ‘‘Why am I eating this flesh? Why am
I doing this? Ill have to repay with my own flesh in another life.”’
The whole idea is to discourage one from eating meat.

Thus, because there are different types of men, there are eighteen Purdnas to guide them. The Vedic literatures are meant to
redeem all men, not just a few. It is not that those who are meateaters or drunkards are rejected. A doctor accepts all patients, and
he prescribes different medicines according to the disease. It is not
that he gives the same medicine for all diseases or that he treats
just one disease. No, he offers a specific type of medicine to
whomever comes, and the patient receives gradual treatment.
However, the sattvic Purdnas like the Padma Purana are meant for
those in the mode of goodness, for those who immediately are
capable of worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

In Brahma-samhita it is stated, isvarah paramah krsnah sac-cidananda-vigrahah: ‘‘The supreme controller is Krsna, who has an
eternal, blissful, spiritual body.’’ This is the Vedic pronouncement, and we thus accept Sri Krsna as the Supreme Lord. Those
who are in the modes of passion and ignorance attempt to imagine
the form of God, and when they are confused, they say, ‘‘Oh,
there is no personal God. God is impersonal, or void.’’ This is just
the result of frustration. Actually, God has His form. And why
not? According to the Veddnta-sitra, janmady asya yatah: ‘‘The
Supreme Absolute Truth is He from whom everything emanates.”” It is easy to see that we have different types of bodies, dif
 

Learning How to See God 29

| ferent types of forms. We must consider where these forms are
' Coming from. Where have these forms originated? We have to use
| a little common sense. If God is not a person, how can His sons be

persons? If your father is just a void, if he is not a person, how can

| you be a person? If your father has no form, how can you have

form? This is not very difficult; it is just a commonsense question.
Unfortunately, because people are frustrated, they try to imagine
some form, or they conclude that because this material form is
temporary and troublesome, God must be formless. Indeed, be
cause all forms in this material world must perish, God, of
~ Mecessity, must be formless.

Brahma-samhita specifically states that this conception is a
mistake. /Svarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-dnanda-vigrahah. God has
form, but His form is sac-cid-dnanda-vigraha. Sat means ‘‘eternal,’’ cit means ‘‘knowledge,’’ and a@nanda means ‘“‘pleasure.”’

God has form, but His form is eternal and is full of knowledge and

pleasure. We cannot compare His form to our form. Our form is
neither eternal, full of pleasure, nor full of knowledge; therefore
God’s form is different.

As soon as we speak of form, we think that form must be like

| Ours, and we therefore conclude that the eternal, all-knowing, and

all-blissful God must be without form. This is not knowledge but

| the result of imperfect speculation. According to Padma Purana,
| atah sri-krsna-namadi na bhaved grahyam indriyaih: ‘‘One cannot

understand the form, name, quality, or paraphernalia of God with

One’s material senses.’’ Since our senses are imperfect, we cannot

speculate on Him who is supremely perfect. That is not possible.
Then how is it possible to understand Him? Sevonmukhe hi

Jihvadau. By training and purifying our senses, we may come to

understand and see God. Presently we are attempting to understand God with impure, imperfect senses. It is like someone with
cataracts trying to see. Just because one has cataracts, he should
not conclude that there is nothing to be seen. Similarly, we cannot
presently conceive of God’s form, but once our cataracts are
removed, we can see. According to Brahma-samhita, premanjanacchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayaniti:
‘The devotees whose eyes are anointed with the ointment of love

 
 

 

30 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

of God can see God within their hearts twenty-four hours a day.”’
Purification of the senses is what is required; then we can understand the name, form, qualities, and pastimes of God. Then we'll
be able to see God everywhere and in everything.

These matters are discussed thoroughly in the Vedic
literatures. For instance, it is said that although God has no hands
or legs, He can accept whatever we offer (apdani-pddo javano
grhita). It is also stated that although God has neither eyes nor
ears, He can see and hear everything. These are apparent contradictions, but they are meant to teach us an important lesson.
When we speak of seeing, we think of material vision. Due to our
material conception, we think that the eyes of God must be like
ours.. Therefore, in order to remove these material conceptions,
the Vedic literatures say that God has no hands, legs, eyes, ears,
etc. God has eyes, but His vision is infinite. He can see in darkness, and He can see everywhere at once; therefore He has different eyes. Similarly, God has ears and can hear. He may be in
His kingdom, millions and millions of miles away, but He can hear
us whispering, because He is sitting within. We cannot avoid
God’s seeing, hearing, or touching. .

patram puspam phalam toyam
yo me bhaktya prayacchati

tad aham bhakty-upahrtam
asnami prayatatmanah

‘‘If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit, or
water, I will accept it.’’ (Bg. 9.26) If God does not have senses,
how can He accept and eat the offerings that are presented to
Him? According to ritual, we are offering Krsna food daily, and
we can see that the taste of this food is immediately changed. This
is a practical example. God eats, but because He is full, He does
not eat like us. If I offer you a plate of food, you will eat it, and it
will be finished. God is not hungry, but He eats, and at the sare
time, He leaves the food as it is, and thus it is transformed into
prasada, His mercy. Purnasya purnam adaya purnam evavasisyate.
God is full, yet He accepts all the food that we offer. Still, the food
remains as it is. He can eat with His eyes. As stated in Brahma
 

Learning How to See God 31

samhita, angani yasya sakalendriya-vrttimanti: ‘‘Every sense of the
Lord’s body has all the potencies of the other senses.’’ Although
we can see with our eyes, we cannot eat with our eyes. The senses
of God, however, being infinite, are different. Simply by looking
at the food that is offered to Him, He eats it.

This may not be understood at the present moment; therefore
the Padma Purana states that when one becomes spiritually saturated by rendering transcendental service to the Lord, the transcendental name, form, qualities, and pastimes of the Lord are
revealed. We cannot understand God by our own endeavor, but
out of mercy God reveals Himself to us. If it is night, and you want
to see the sun, you will have to wait for the sun to appear in the
morning. You cannot go outside with a big torch and say, ‘‘Come
on, I will show you the sunlight.’’ In the morning, when the sun
rises of its own will, we can see it. Because our senses are imperfect, we cannot see God by our own endeavor. We have to
purify our senses and wait for the time when God will be pleased
to reveal Himself to us. That is the process. We cannot challenge
God. We cannot say, ‘““O my dear God, my dear Krsna. Please
come. I want to see You.’’ No, God is not our order supplier. He is
not our servant. When He is pleased, we will see Him; therefore
this Krsna consciousness is a process by which we can please God
so that He will reveal Himself to us.

Because people cannot see God, they readily accept anyone
who says, ‘‘I am God.”’ Because people have no conception of
God, they are eager to accept any rascal who comes along and
proclaims himself to be God. People are fond of saying, ‘‘I am
searching after the truth,’ but in order to search for the truth, we
must know what the truthis. Otherwise, how can we search it out?
If we want to purchase gold, we must at least theoretically know
what gold is, otherwise we will be cheated. Consequently, having
no conception of the truth or of God, people are being cheated by
SO many rascals who say, ‘‘I am God.” In a society of rascals, one
rascal accepts another rascal as God, and this is all the result of
rascaldom. But all this has nothing to do with God. One has to
qualify himself to see and understand God, and that process of
qualification is called Krsna consciousness. Sevonmukhe hi
jihvadau svayam eva sphuraty adah: by engaging ourselves in God’s

 
 

32 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

service, we become qualified to see God. Otherwise it is not possible. We may be great scientists or scholars, but our mundane
scholarship will not help us see God.

This Bhagavad-gita is the science of Krsna consciousness, and
in order to understand Krsna, we must be fortunate enough to
associate with a person who is in pure Krsna consciousness. We
cannot understand Bhagavad-gita simply by acquiring an M.A.,
Ph.D., or whatever. Bhagavad-gitd is a transcendental Science, and
it requires different senses in order to be understood. Our senses
must be purified by the rendering of service, not by the acquiring
of academic degrees. There are many Ph.D.’s, many scholars, who
cannot understand Krsna. Therefore Krsna appears in the material
world. Although He is unborn (ajo ‘pi sann avyayatma) , He comes
to reveal Himself to us.

Thus Krsna is realized by the grace of Krsna or by the grace ofa
Krsna conscious person who has realized Krsna by the grace of
Krsna. We cannot understand Him through academic knowledge.
We can only understand Krsna by acquiring the grace of Krsna.
Once we acquire His grace, we can see Him, talk with Him—do
whatever we desire. It is not that Krsna is a void. He is a person,
the Supreme Person, and we can have a relationship with Him.
That is the Vedic injunction. Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam:
**We are all eternal persons, and God is the supreme eternal person.’ We are all eternal, and God is the supreme eternal.
Presently, because we are encaged within these bodies, we are experiencing birth and death, but actually we are beyond birth and
death. We are eternal spirit souls, but according to our work and
desires, we are transmigrating from one body to another. It is explained in the Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gitd (2.20),

na jayate mriyate va kadacim

nayam bhutva bhavita va na bhiiyah
ajo nityah sasvato ‘yam purano

na hanyate hanyam@ne sarire

‘**For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once
been, does he ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever
 

Learning How to See God 33

existing, undying, and primeval. He is not slain when the body ts
slain.”

Just as God is eternal, we are also eternal, and when we
establish our eternal relationship with the supreme, complete
eternal, we realize our eternality. Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam. God is the supreme living entity among all living entities,
the supreme eternal among all eternals. By Krsna consciousness,
by purification of the senses, this knowledge will be realized, and
we will come to see God.

A Krsna conscious person has realized knowledge, by the grace
of Krsna, because he is satisfied with pure devotional service. By
realized knowledge, one becomes perfect.. By transcendental
knowledge one can remain steady in his convictions, but by mere
academic knowledge one can be easily deluded and confused by
apparent contradictions. It is the realized soul who is actually selfcontrolled, because he is surrendered to Krsna. He is transcendental because he has nothing to do with mundane scholarship.
For him, mundane scholarship and mental speculation, which
may be as good as gold to others, are of no greater value than pebbles or stones.

Even if one is illiterate, he can realize God simply by engaging
himself in submissive, transcendental loving service. God is not
subjected to any material condition. He is supreme spirit, and the
process of realizing Him is also beyond material considerations.
Therefore, one may bea very learned scholar and still not be able
to understand God. One should not think that because he is very
poor he cannot realize God; nor should one think that he can
realize God just because he is very rich. God may be understood
by an uneducated person and misunderstood by one with great
education. The understanding of God, like God Himself, is unconditional (apratihata).

In Srimad-Bhdgavatam (1.2.6) it is stated,

sa vai pumsam paro dharmo
yato bhaktir adhoksaje

ahaituky apratihata
yayatma suprasidati
 

34 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

‘“‘The supreme occupation (dharma) for all humanity is that by
which men can attain to loving devotional service unto the transcendent Lord. Such devotional service must be unmotivated and
uninterrupted to completely satisfy the self.’’ Cultivation of love
of God: that is the definition of first-class religion. Just as there are
three gunas, or three qualities, in the material world, there are
various religions, each situated in one of the three modes. We are
not, however, concerned with analyzing these religious conceptions. For us, the purpose of religion is to understand God and to
learn how to love God. That is the real purpose of any first-class
religious system. If a religion does not teach love of God, it is useless. One may follow his religious principles very carefully, but if
one does not possess love of God, his religion is null and void. According to Srimad-Bhdgavatam (1.2.6) real religion must be
ahaituki and apratihata: without selfish motivation and without
impediment. By practicing such a religion, we will become happy
in all respects.

Sa vai pumsam paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhoksaje. Another
name for God is adhoksaja, which means ‘‘one who cannot be
seen by materialistic attempts.’” That is to say that God conquers
all our attempts to see Him materially. The word aksaja refers to
experimental knowledge, and adhah means “‘unreachable.’’ So
God cannot be reached through experimental knowledge. We
have to learn to contact Him in a different way: through submissive hearing and the rendering of transcendental loving
Service.

True religion teaches causeless love of God. It does not say, “‘I
love God because He supplies me nice objects for my sense gratification.’’ That is not love. God is great, God is our eternal father,
and it is our duty to love Him. There is no question of barter or exchange. We should not think, °‘Oh, God gives me my daily bread;
therefore I love God.’’ God gives daily bread even to the cats and
dogs. Since He is the father of everyone, He issupplying everyone
food. So loving God for daily bread is not love. Love is without
reason. Even if God does not supply us our daily bread, we should
love Him. That is true love. As Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, dslisya
va pada-ratam pinastu mam adarsanan marma-hatam karotu va: ‘‘I

 

| Learning How to See God 35

know no one but Krsna as my Lord, and He shall remain so even if
He handles me roughly by His embrace or makes me brokenhearted by not being present before me. He is completely free to
do anything and everything, for He is always my worshipful Lord,
unconditionally.”’ That is the sentiment of one who is established
in pure love of God. When we attain that stage of love of God, we
will find that everything is full of pleasure; God is full of pleasure,
and we also are full of pleasure.

suhrn-mitrary-udasinamadhyastha-dvesya-bandhusu

sadhusv api ca papesu
sama-buddhir visisyate

‘*A person is said to be still further advanced when he regards
all—the honest well-wisher, friends and enemies, the envious, the
pious, the sinner, and those who are indifferent and impartial—
with an equal mind.”’ (Bg. 6.9) This is a sign of real spiritual advancement. In this material world we are considering people
friends and enemies on the bodily platform—that is, on the basis
of sense gratification. If one gratifies our senses, he is our friend,
and if he doesn’t, he is our enemy. However, once we have
realized God, or the Absolute Truth, there are no such material
considerations.

In this material world, all conditioned souls are under illusion.
A doctor treats all patients, and although a patient may be
delirious and insult the doctor, the doctor does not refuse to treat
him. He still administers the medicine that is required. As Lord
Jesus Christ said, we should hate the sin, not the sinner. That is a
very nice statement, because the sinner is under illusion. He is
mad. If we hate him, how can we deliver him? Therefore, those
who are advanced devotees, who are really servants of God, do
not hate anyone. When Lord Jesus Christ was being crucified, he
said, ‘‘My God, forgive them. They know not what they do.”’ This
is the proper attitude of an advanced devotee. He understands that
the conditioned souls cannot be hated, because they have become
mad due to their materialistic way of thinking. In this Krsna
 

 

36 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

consciousness movement, there is no question of hating anyone.
Everyone is welcomed to come and chant Hare Krsna, take krsnaprasada, listen to the philosophy of Bhagavad-gita, and try to rectify material, conditioned life. This is the essential program of
Krsna consciousness. Therefore, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu said,

yare dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna’-upadesa
amara Gjnaya guru hana tara’ ei desa

‘*Instruct everyone to follow the orders of Lord Sri Krsna as they
are given in Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam. In this way
become a spiritual master and try to liberate everyone in this
land.’’ (Cc. Madhya 7.128)

yogi yunjita satatam
atmanam rahasi sthitah

ekaki yata-cittatma
nirasir aparigrahah

‘*A transcendentalist should always try to concentrate his mind on
the Supreme Self; he should live alone in a secluded place and
should always carefully control his mind. He should be free from
-desires and feelings of possessiveness.”’ (Bg. 6.10)

In this chapter, in which the Lord ts teaching the principles of
the yoga system, He here points out that a transcendentalist
should always try to concentrate his mind on the Supreme Self.
‘*The Supreme Self’’ refers to Krsna, the Supreme Lord. As explained before (nityo nitydndm cetanas cetananam), God is the
supreme eternal, the supreme living entity, the Supreme Self. The
purpose of the entire yoga system is to concentrate the mind on
this Supreme Self. We are not the Supreme Self. That should be
understood. The Supreme Self is God. This is dvaita-vada—
duality. Duality means that God is different from me. He is
supreme, and I am subordinate. He is great, and I am small. He is
infinite, and I am infinitesimal. This is the relationship between
ourselves and God as we should understand it. Because we are infinitesimal, we should concentrate our mind on the infinite
Supreme Self. In order to do this, we should live alone, and ‘‘liv
 

Learning How to See God 37

ing alone’’ means that we should not live with those who are not
Krsna conscious. Ideally, this means that one should live in a
secluded place, like a forest or a jungle, but in this age such a
secluded place is very difficult to find. Therefore ‘‘secluded place’”’
refers to that place where God consciousness is taught.

The transcendentalist should also carefully control his mind,
and this means fixing the mind on the Supreme Self, or Krsna. As
explained before, Krsna is just like the sun, and if the mind is
fixed on Him, there is no question of darkness. If Krsna is always
on our minds, maya, or illusion, can never enter. This ts the process of concentration..

The transcendentalist should also be free from desires and feelings of possessiveness. People are materially diseased because
they desire things and want to possess them. We desire that which
we do not have, and we lament for that which we have lost.
Brahma-bhutah prasannatma. One who is actually God conscious
does not desire material possessions. He has only one desire—to
serve Krsna. It is not possible to give up desire, but it is possible to
purify our desires. It is the nature of the living entity to have some
desire, but in the conditioned state, one’s desire is contaminated.
Conditioned, one thinks, ‘‘I desire to satisfy my senses by material possession.”’ Purified desire is desire for Krsna, and if we
desire Krsna, desires for material possessions will automatically
vanish.

sucau dese pratisthapya
sthiram a@sanam atmanah

naty-ucchritam nati-nicam
cailajina-kusottaram

tatraikagram manah krtva
yata-cittendriya-kriyah

upavisyasane yunjyad
yogam atma-visuddhaye

‘*To practice yoga, one should go to a secluded place and should
lay kusa grass on the ground and then cover it with a deerskin and
a soft cloth. The seat should neither be too high nor too low and
 

 

38 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

should be situated in a sacred place. The yogi should then sit on it
very firmly and should practice yoga by controlling the mind and
the senses, purifying the heart, and fixing the mind on one point.”’
(Bg. 6.11-12) In these verses it is emphasized how and where one
should sit. In the United States and other Western countries,
there are many so-called yoga societies, but they do not practice
yoga according to these prescriptions. “‘A sacred place”’ refers to a
place of pilgrimage. In India, the yogis, the transcendentalists, or
devotees, all leave home and reside in sacred places such as
Prayaga, Mathura, Vrndavana, Hrsikesa, and Hardwar and in
solitude practice yoga where the sacred rivers like the Yamuna and
the Ganges flow. So how is this possible in this age? How many
people are prepared to find such a sacred place? In order to earn
one’s livelihood, one has to live in a congested city. There is no
question of finding a sacred place, but for the practice of yoga, that
is the first prerequisite.

Therefore in this bhakti-yoga system, the temple is considered
the sacred place. The temple is nirguna—transcendental. According to the Vedas, a city is in the mode of passion, and a forest is in
the mode of goodness. The temple, however, is transcendental. If
you live in a city or town, you live in a place where passion is predominant, and if you want to escape this, you may go to a forest, a
place of goodness. God’s temple, however, is above passion and
goodness; therefore the temple of Krsna is the only secluded place
for this age. In this age, it is not possible to retreat to a forest; nor
is it useful to make a show of practicing yoga in so-called yoga
societies and at the same time engage in nonsense.

Therefore, in the Brhan-naradiya Purana it is said that in Kaliyuga, when people are generally short-lived slow in spiritual
realization, and always disturbed by various anxieties, the best
means of spiritual realization is chanting the holy names of the
Lord.

harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam

kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha

\

 

 

Learning How to See God 39

‘In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy, the only means of
deliverance is chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no
other way. There is no other way. There is no other way.”’

This is the solution, the grand gift of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In
this age, other yoga practices are not feasible, but this practice is so
simple and universal that even a child can take to it.
 

 

 

 

CHAPTER FOUR

Moderation in Yoga

In this Sixth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, the system of sankhyayoga, which is the meditational astanga-yoga system, is emphasized. Jiana-yoga emphasizes the philosophical process of
analysis by which we determine what is Brahman and what is not
Brahman. This process is known as the neti neti process, or ‘‘not
this, not that.’ In the beginning of the Vedanta-sutra it is stated,
janmady asya yatah: ‘‘The Supreme Brahman, the Absolute
Truth, is He from whom everything emanates.”’ This is a hint, and
from this we must try to understand the nature of the Supreme
Brahman, from whom everything is emanating. The nature of that
Absolute Truth is explained in detail in Srimad-Bhagavatam.

In the first verse of Srimad-Bhdgavatam it is stated,

om namo bhagavate vasudevaya

janmady asya yato ‘nvayad itaratas carthesv abhijnah svarat
tene brahma hrda ya adi-kavaye muhyanti yat surayah
tejo-vari-mrdam yatha vinimayo yatra tri-sargo ‘mrsa
dhamna svena sada nirasta-kuhakam satyam param dhimahi

‘QO my Lord, Sri Krsna, son of Vasudeva, O all-pervading Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You. I
meditate upon Lord Sri Krsna because He is the Absolute Truth
and the primeval cause of all causes of the creation, sustenance,
and destruction of the manifested universes. He is directly and indirectly conscious of all manifestations, and He is independent beCause there is no other cause beyond Him. It is He only who first
imparted the Vedic knowledge unto the heart of Brahméaji, the

4]
 

42 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

original living being. By Him even the great sages and demigods
are placed into illusion, as one is bewildered by the illusory representations of water seen in fire, or land seen on water. Only be- cause of Him do the material universes, temporarily manifested
by the reactions of the three modes of nature, appear factual, although they are unreal. I therefore meditate upon Him, Lord Sri
Krsna, who is eternally existent in the transcendental abode.
which is forever free from the illusory representations of the material world. I meditate upon Him, for He is the Absolute Truth.”

Thus from the very beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam the Absolute Truth is proclaimed to be cognizant. He is not dead or void.
And what is the nature of His cognizance? Anvaydd itaratas
carthesu: ‘‘He is directly and indirectly cognizant of all manifestations.’ To a limited degree, each and every living entity is cognizant, but we are not completely cognizant. I may claim, “This ts
my head,’’ but if someone asks me, ‘‘Do you know how many
hairs are on your head?”’ I will not be able to reply. Of course, this
kind of knowledge is not transcendental, but in SrimadBhagavatam it is stated that the Supreme Absolute Truth knows
everything, directly and indirectly. I may know that I am eating,
but I do not know the intricacies of the eating process—how my
body is exactly assimilating food, how the blood is passing through
my veins, etc. I am cognizant that my body is functioning, but I do
not know how these processes are working perfectly and all at
once. This is because my Knowledge is limited.

By definition, God is He who knows everything. He knows
what is going on in every corner of His creation; therefore,
from the very beginning, Srimad-Bhagavatam explains that the
Supreme Truth from whom everything is emanating is supremely
cognizant (abhijnah). One may ask, ‘‘If the Absolute Truth is so
powerful, wise, and cognizant, He must have attained this knowledge from some similar being.’’ This is not the case. If He attains

His knowledge from someone else, He is not God. Svarat. He is

independent, and His knowledge is automatically there.
Srimad-Bhagavatam is the supreme combination of both the

jndna- and bhakti-yoga systems, because it analyzes in detail the

nature of that Supreme Being from whom everything is emanat
Moderation in Yoga 43

ing. By the jnana-yoga system, one attempts to understand the
nature of the Absolute Truth in a philosophical way. In the bhaktiyoga system, the target is the same. The methodology, however, 1s
somewhat different. Whereas the jianiattempts to concentrate his
mind philosophically on the Supreme, the bhakta simply engages
himself in the service of the Supreme Lord, and the Lord reveals
Himself. The jana method is called the ascending process; and
the bhaktimethod is called the descending process. If we are in the
darkness of night, we may attempt to attain the sunlight by
ascending in a powerful rocket. According to the descending process, however, we simply await the sunrise, and then we understand immediately.

Through the ascending process, we attempt to reach the
Supreme through our own endeavor, through the process of induction. By induction, we may attempt to find out whether man is
mortal by studying thousands of men, trying to see whether they
are mortal or immortal. This, of course, will take a great deal of
time. If, however, I accept from superior authority the fact that all
men are mortal, my knowledge is complete and immediate. Thus
it is stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.29), ‘‘My dear Lord, a
person who has received a little favor from You can understand
You very quickly. But those who are trying to understand You by
the ascending process may go on speculating for millions of years
and still never understand You.”’

By mental speculation, one is more likely to simply reach a
point of frustration and confusion and conclude, ‘‘Oh, God is
zero.” But if God is zero, how are so many figures emanating from
Him? As the Vedanta says (janmddy asya yatah), ‘‘Everything is
generating from the Supreme.”’ Therefore the Supreme cannot be
zero. We have to study how so many forms, so many infinite living entities, are being generated from the Supreme. This is also
explained in the Veddnta-sutra, which is the study of ultimate
knowledge. The word veda means ‘“‘knowledge,”’ and anta means
‘“‘ultimate.’’ Ultimate knowledge is knowledge of the Supreme
Lord.

So how is it possible to understand the form of Krsna? If it is
Stated that God does not have eyes, limbs, and senses like ours,
 

44 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

how are we to understand His transcendental senses, His transcendental form? This is not possible by mental speculation. We
simply have to serve Him, and then He will reveal Himself to us.
As Krsna Himself states in the Tenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita
(10.11),

tesam evanukampartham
aham ajnana-jam tamah

nasayamy atma-bhava-stho
jnana-dipena bhasvata

‘‘Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy

with the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ig
norance.’’ Krsna is within us, and when we are sincerely searching

for Him by the devotional process, He will reveal Himself.

, Again, as stated in the Eighteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita
18.55),

bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah

tato mam tattvato jnatva
visate tad-anantaram

**One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by
devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the
Supreme Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of
God.”’ Thus God has to be understood by this process of bhaktiyoga, which is the process of sravanam kirtanam visnoh—hearing
and chanting about Visnu. This is the beginning of the bhakti-yoga
process. If we but hear sincerely and submissively, we will
understand. Krsna will reveal Himself. Sravanam kirtanam visnoh
smaranam pada-sevanam arcanam vandanam dasyam. There are
nine different processes in the bhakti-yoga system. By vandanam,

we Offer prayers, and that is also bhakti. Sravanam is hearing about
Krsna from Bhagavad-gita, Srimad-Bhdagavatam, and other Ssastras.

Kirtanam is chanting about His glories, chanting the Hare Krsna
mantra. This is the beginning of the bhakti-yoga process. Sravanam

 

Moderation in Yoga ~ 45

kirtanam visnoh. Everything is Visnu, and meditation is on Visnu.
It 1s not possible to have bhakti without Visnu. Krsna is the
original form of Visnu (krsnas tu bhagavan svayam: ‘‘Krsna is the
original form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead’’). If we but
follow this bhakti-yoga process, we should be able to understand
the Supreme, and all doubts should be removed.

The astanga-yoga process is outlined very specifically in the
Sixth Chapter of Bhagavad-gitd (6.13-14):

samam kaya-siro-grivam
dharayann acalam sthirah

sampreksya nasikagram svam
disas canavalokayan

prasantatma vigata-bhir
brahmacari-vrate sthitah
manah samyamya mac-citto
- -yukta asita mat-parah

“One should hold one’s body, neck, and head erect in a straight
line and stare steadily at the tip of the nose. Thus, with an unagitated, subdued mind, devoid of fear, completely free from sex
life, one should meditate upon Me within the heart and make Me
the ultimate goal of life.’ Yoga does not mean going to some class,
paying some money, engaging in gymnastics, and then returning
home to drink, smoke, and engage in sex. Such yoga is practiced
by societies of the cheaters and the cheated. The authoritative
yoga system is here outlined by the supreme authority, Sri Krsna
Himself. Is there a better yogi than Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead? First of all, one has to go alone to a holy
place and sit in a straight line, holding one’s body, neck, and head
erect, and stare steadily at the tip of the nose. Why is this? This is
a method to help concentrate one’s mind. That’s all. The real purpose of yoga, however, is to keep oneself always aware that Lord
Krsna is within.

One of the dangers of sitting in meditation and staring at the
tip of one’s nose is that one will fall asleep. I have seen many
 

46 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

so-called meditators sitting like this and snoring. As soon as one
closes his eyes, it is natural to feel sleepy; therefore it is recommended that the eyes are half closed. Thus it is said that one
should look at the tip of his nose. With one’s sight thus concentrated, the mind should be subdued and unagitated. In India, the
yogi often goes to a jungle to practice such meditation in solitude.
But in a jungle, the yogi may think, ‘‘Maybe some tiger or snake is
coming. What is that noise?” In this way, his mind may be agitated, therefore it is especially stated that the yogi must be
‘“devoid of fear.” A deerskin is especially recommended as a
yoga-asana, because it contains a chemical property that repels
snakes, thus the yogi will not be disturbed by serpents. Whatever
the case—serpents, tigers, or lions—one can be truly fearless only
when he is established in Krsna consciousness. Due to perverted
memory, the conditioned soul is naturally fearful. Fear is due to
forgetting one’s eternal relationship with Krsna. According to
Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.2.37): bhayam dvitiydbhinivesatah sydd
isad apetasya viparyayo ’smrtih. Krsna consciousness provides the
only true basis for fearlessness; therefore perfect practice of yoga
is not possible for one who is not Krsna conscious.

The yogi must also be ‘‘completely free from sex life.’ If one
indulges in sex, he cannot concentrate; therefore brahmacarya,
complete celibacy, is recommended to make the mind steady. By
practicing celibacy, one cultivates determination. One modern example of such determination is that of Mahatma Gandhi, who was
determined to resist the powerful British empire by means of nonviolence. At this time, India was dependent on the British, and the
people had no weapons. The Britishers, being more powerful,
easily cut down whatever violent revolutions the people attempted. Therefore Gandhi resorted to nonviolence, noncooperation. “‘I shall not fight with the Britishers,’’ he declared, ‘‘and
even if they react with violence, I shall remain nonviolent. In this
way the world will sympathize with us.’’ Such a policy required a
great amount of determination, and Gandhi’s determination was
very strong because he was a brahmacari. Although he had
children and a wife, he renounced sex at the age of thirty-six. It
was this sexual renunciation that enabled him to be so determined

 

Moderation in Yoza 4]

that he was able to lead his country and drive the British from
India.
Thus, refraining from sex enables one to be very determined

and powerful. It is not necessary to do anything else. This is a
secret people are not aware of. If you want to do something with
determination, you have to refrain from sex. Regardless of the
process—be it hatha-yoga, bhakti-yoga, jnana-yoga, or whatever —
sex indulgence is not allowed. Sex is allowed only for householders who want to beget good children and raise them in Krsna
consciousness. Sex iS not meant for sense enjoyment, although
enjoyment is there by nature. Unless there is some enjoyment,
why should one assume the responsibility of begetting children?
That is the secret of nature’s gift, but we should not take advantage of it. These are the secrets of life. By taking advantage and indulging in sex life, we are simply wasting our time. If one tells you
that you can indulge in sex as much as you like and at the same
time become a yogi, he is cheating you. If some so-called guru tells
you to give him money in exchange for some mantra and that you
can go on and engage in all kinds of nonsense, he is just cheating
you. Because we want something sublime and yet want it cheaply,
we put ourselves in a position to be cheated. This means that we
actually want to be cheated. If we want something valuable, we
must pay for it. We cannot expect to walk into a jewelry store and
demand the most valuable jewel for a mere ten cents. No, we must
pay a great deal. Similarly, if we want perfection in yoga, we have
to pay by abstaining from sex. Perfection in yoga is not something
childish, and Bhagavada-gita instructs us that if we try to make yoga
into something childish, we will be cheated. There are many
cheaters awaiting us, waiting to take our money, giving us nothing,
and then leaving. But according to Sri Krsna’s authoritative statement in Bhagavad-gitd, one must be ‘‘completely free from sex
life.’ Being free from sex, one should ‘meditate upon Me within
the heart and make Me the ultimate goal of life.’ This is real
meditation.

Krsna does not recommend meditation on the void. He
specifically states, ‘meditate upon Me.” The visnu-muirti is situated in one’s heart, and meditation upon Him is the object of yoga.
48 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

This is the sankhya-yoga system, as first practiced by Lord
Kapiladeva, an incarnation of God. By sitting straight, staring
Steadily at the tip of one’s nose, subduing one’s mind, and abStaining from sex, one may be able to concentrate the mind on the
visnu-murti Situated within the heart. When we refer to the Visnu
form, or visnu-muarti, we refer to Sri Krsna.

In this Krsna consciousness movement we are meditating
directly on Sri Krsna. This is a process of practical meditation. The
members of this movement are concentrating their minds on
Krsna, regardless of their particular occupation. One may be working in the garden and digging in the earth, but he is thinking, ‘‘I
am cultivating beautiful roses to offer to Krsna.’ One may be
cooking in the kitchen, but he is always thinking, *‘I am preparing
palatable food to be offered to Krsna.’’ Similarly, chanting and
dancing in the temple are forms of meditating on Krsna. Thus the
boys and girls in this Society for Krsna consciousness are perfect
yogis because they are meditating on Krsna twenty-four hours a
day. We are teaching the perfect yoga system, not according to our
personal whims but according to the authority of Bhagavad-gita.
Nothing is concocted or manufactured. The verses of Bhagavadgita are there for all to see. The activities of the bhakti-yogis in this
movement are so molded that the practitioners cannot help but
think of Krsna at all times. ‘‘Meditate upon Me within the heart,
and make Me the ultimate goal of life,’ Sri Krsna says. This is.the
perfect yoga system, and one who practices it prepares himself to
be transferred to Krsnaloka.

yunjann evam sadatmanam
yogi niyata-manasah

Santim nirvana-paramam
mat-samstham adhigacchati

‘‘Thus practicing control of the body, mind, and activities, the
mystic transcendentalist attains to the kingdom of God [or the
abode of Krsna] by cessation of material existence.’ (Bg. 6.15)
It is stated in Sanskrit in this verse, santim nirvana-paramam;
that is, one attains peace through nirvana-paramam, or the cessa
 

 

Moderation in Yoga 49

tion of material activities. Nirvana does not refer to void, but to
putting an end to materialistic activities. Unless one puts an end to
them, there is no question of peace. When Hiranyakasipu asked
his five-year-old son Prahlada Maharaja, ‘‘My dear boy, what is
the best thing you have thus far learned?”’’ Prahlada immediately
replied, tat sadhu manye ‘sura-varya dehinam sada samudvignadhiyam asad-grahat: *‘My dear father, O greatest of the demons,
materialistic people are always full of anxiety because they have
accepted as real that which is nonpermanent.’’ The word asaagrahat is important because it indicates that materialists are always
hankering to capture or possess something that is nonpermanent.
History affords us many examples. Mr. Kennedy was a very rich
man who wanted to become President, and he spent a great deal
of money to attain that elevated position. Yet although he had a
nice wife, children, and the presidency, everything was finished
within a second. In the material world, people are always trying to
capture something that is nonpermanent. Unfortunately, people
do not come to their senses and realize, ‘‘I am permanent.
I am spirit soul. Why am I hankering after something that is
nonpermanent?”’

We are always busy acquiring comforts for this body without
considering that today, tomorrow, or in a hundred years this body
will be finished. As far as the real ‘‘I’’ is concerned, “‘I am spirit
soul. I have no birth. I have no death. What, then, is my proper
function?’’ When we act on the material platform, we are engaged
in bodily functions; therefore Prahlada Maharaja says that people
are anxious because all their activities are targeted to capturing
and possessing something nonpermanent. All living entities—
men, beasts, birds, or whatever—are always full of anxiety, and
this is the material disease. If we are always full of anxiety, how
can we attain peace? People may live in a very nice house, but out
front they place signs saying, ‘‘Beware of Dog,’ or ‘‘No
Trespassers.’’ This means that although they are living comfortably, they are anxious that someone will come and molest them.
Sitting in an office and earning a very good salary, a man is always
thinking, ‘‘Oh, I hope I don’t lose this position.’ The American
nation is very rich, but because of this, it has to maintain a great
 

50 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

defense force. So who is free from anxiety? The conclusion is that
if we want peace without anxiety, we have to come to Krsna consciousness. There is no alternative.

In order to attain peace, we must meditate on Krsna, and by
meditating on Krsna, we can control the body. The first part of the
body to control is the tongue, and the next part is the genital.
When these are controlled, everything is controlled. The tongue is
controlled by chanting and eating krsna-prasada. As soon as the
tongue is controlled, the stomach its controlled, and next the
genitals are controlled. Actually, controlling the body and mind ts
a very simple process. When the mind is fixed on Krsna and has
no other engagement, it is automatically controlled. Activities
should always be centered on working for Krsna—gardening, typing, cooking, cleaning, whatever. By engaging the body, mind,
and activities in the service of Krsna, one attains the supreme nirvana, which abides in Krsna. Everything is in Krsna; therefore we
cannot find peace outside Krsna conscious activities.

The ultimate goal of yoga is thus clearly explained. Yoga is not
meant for attaining any kind of material facility; it is to enable the
cessation of all material existence. As long as we require some material facilities, we will get them. But these facilities will not solve
the problems of life. I have traveled throughout the world, and it
is my opinion that American boys and girls have the best material

facilities, but does this mean that they have attained peace? Can .

anyone say, ‘“Yes, | am completely peaceful’’? If this is so, why
are American youngsters so frustrated and confused?

As long as we practice yoga in order to attain some material

facility, there will be no question of peace. Yoga should only be
practiced in order to understand Krsna. Yoga is meant for the reestablishment of our lost relationship with Krsna. Generally, one
joins a yoga society in order to improve his health, to reduce fat.
People in rich nations eat more, become fat, and then pay exorbitant prices to so-called yoga instructors in order to reduce. People
try to reduce by all these artificial gymnastics; they do not underStand that if they just eat vegetables or fruits and grains, they will
never get fat. People get fat because they eat voraciously, because
they eat meat. People who eat voraciously suffer from diabetes,

 

Moderation in Yoga 51

overweight, heart attacks, etc., and those who eat insufficiently
suffer from tuberculosis. Therefore moderation is required, and
moderation in eating means that we eat only what is needed to
keep body and soul together. If we eat more than we need or less,
we will become diseased. All this is explained in the following
verses:

naty-asnatas tu yogo ’sti
na caikantam anasnatah

na cati-svapna-Ssilasya
Jagrato naiva carjuna

‘‘There is no possibility of one’s becoming a yogi, O Arjuna, if one
eats too much, or eats too little, sleeps too much, or does not sleep
enough.”’ (Bg. 6.16)

yuktahara-viharasya
yukta-cestasya karmasu

yukta-svapnavabodhasya
yogo bhavati duhkha-ha

‘*He who is temperate in his habits of eating, sleeping, working,
and recreation can mitigate all material pains by practicing the
yoga system.””’ (Bg. 6.17) It is not that we are to starve ourselves.
The body must be kept fit for any practice; therefore eating is required, and according to our program, we eat only Arsna-prasada.
If you can comfortably eat ten pounds of food a day, then eat it,
but if you try to eat ten pounds out of greed or avarice, you will
suffer.

So in the practice of Krsna consciousness, all these activities
are present, but they are spiritualized. The cessation of material
existence does not mean entering into ‘the void,’ which is only a
myth. There is no void anywhere within the creation of the Lord. I
am not void but spirit soul. If 1 were void, how would my bodily
development take place? Where is this ‘‘void’’? If we sow a seed
in the ground, it grows into a plant or large tree. The father injects
a seed into the womb of the mother, the body grows like a tree.
 

 

52 | THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Where is there void? In the Fourteenth Chapter of Bhagavada-gita
(14.4), Sri Krsna states,

sarva-yonisu kaunteya
murtayah sambhavanti yah

tasam brahma mahad yonir
aham bija-pradah pita

‘It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kunti,
are made possible by birth in this material nature, and that [ am
the seed-giving father.”? The seed is originally given by Krsna,
placed in the womb of material nature, and thus many living entities are generated. How can one argue against this process? If the
seed of existence is void, how has this body developed?

Nirvana actually means not accepting another material body.
It’s not that we attempt to make this body void. Nirvana means
making the miserable, material, conditional body void—that is,
converting the material body into a spiritual body. This means entering into the kingdom of God, which is described in the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavaa-gita (15.6):

na tad bhasayate suryo

sa sasanko na pavakah
yad gatva na nivartante

tad dhama paramam mama

‘**That abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by
electricity. One who reaches it never returns to this material
world.”’ |

So there is no void anywhere within the Lord’s creation. All
the planets in the spiritual sky are self-illumined, like the sun. The
kingdom of God is everywhere, but the spiritual sky and the planets thereof are all param dhama, or superior abodes. As stated,
sunlight, moonlight, or electricity are not required in the param
dhama. We cannot find such an abode within this universe. We
may travel as far as possible within our spaceships, but we will not
find any place where there is no sunlight. The sunlight is so exten
 

 

Moderation in Yoga 53

sive that it pervades the universe. Therefore, that abode in which
there is no sunlight, moonlight, or electricity is beyond this material sky. Beyond this material nature is a spiritual nature. Actually, we know nothing of this material nature; we do not even
know how it was originally formed. So how can we know anything
about the spiritual nature beyond? We have to learn from Krsna,
who lives there; otherwise we remain in ignorance.

In this Bhagavad-gita, information of the spiritual sky is given.
How can we know anything about that which we cannot reach?
Our senses are so imperfect, how can we attain knowledge? We
just have to hear and accept. How will we ever know who our
father is unless we accept the word of our mother? Our mother
says, ‘‘Here is your father,’’ and we have to accept this. We cannot
determine our father by making inquiries here and there or by attempting to experiment. This knowledge is beyond our means.
Similarly, if we want to learn about the spiritual sky, God’s
kingdom, we have to hear from the authority, mother Vedas. The
Vedas are called veda-mata, or mother Vedas, because the knowledge imparted therein is like that knowledge received from the
mother. We have to believe in order to acquire knowledge. There
is no possibility of acquiring this transcendental knowledge by experimenting with our imperfect senses.

A consummate yogi, who is perfect in understanding Lord
Krsna, as is clearly stated herein (santim nirvana-paramam matsamstham adhigacchati) by the Lord Himself, can attain real peace
and ultimately reach the supreme abode of the Lord. This abode is
known as Krsnaloka, or Goloka Vrndavana. In the Brahmasamhitd it is clearly stated (goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhitah)
that the Lord, although residing always in His abode called
Goloka, is the all-pervading Brahman and the localized
Paramatma as well, by dint of His superior spiritual energies. No
one can reach the spiritual sky or enter into the eternal abode of
the Lord (Vaikuntha, Goloka Vrndavana) without properly understanding Krsna and His plenary expansion Visnu. And according to Brahma-samhita, it is necessary to learn from our
authorized mother, veda-mata. Brahma-samhita states that the
Supreme Lord is living not only in His abode, Goloka Vrndavana,
34 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

but everywhere: goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhitah. He ts like
the sun, which is millions of miles away and yet is still present
within this room.

In conclusion, the person who works in Krsna consciousness 1s
the perfect yogi, because his mind is always absorbed in Krsna’s
activities. Sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh. In the Vedas we
also learn, tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti: ““One can overcome the
path of birth and death only by understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.’’ Thus perfection of yoga is the attainment of freedom from material existence and not some
magical jugglery or gymnastic feat to befool innocent people.

In this system of yoga, moderation is required; therefore it is
Stated that we should not eat too much or too little, sleep too
much or too little, or work too much or too little. All these activities are there because we have to execute the yoga system with
this material body. In other words, we have to make the best use
of a bad bargain. The material body is a bad bargain in the sense
that it is the source of all miseries. The spirit soul does not experience misery, and the normal condition of the living entity is
his healthy, spiritual life. Misery and disease occur due to material
contamination, disease, infection. So in a sense, material existence is a diseased condition of the soul. And what is that disease?

. The answer is not a great mystery. The disease is this body. This
body is actually not meant for me. It may be ‘‘my”’ body, but it is a
symptom of my diseased condition. In any case, I should identify
with this body no more than I should identify with my clothes. In
this world, we are all differently dressed. We are dressed as red
men, brown men, white men, black men, yellow men, etc., or as
Indians, Americans, Hindus, Muslims, Christians, etc. All these
designations are not symptomatic of our actual position but of our
diseased condition. The yoga system is meant to cure this disease
by connecting us again with the Supreme.

We are meant to be connected with the Supreme just as our
hand is meant to be connected to our body. We are part and parcel
of the Supreme, just as the hand is part and parcel of the body.
When the hand ts severed from the body, it is valueless, but when
it is joined to the body, it is invaluable. Similarly, in this material

Moderation in Yoga | 55

condition, we are disconnected from God. Actually, the word disconnected is not precise, because the connection Is always there.
God is always supplying all our necessities. Since nothing can exist
without Krsna, we cannot be disconnected from Him. Rather, it is
better to say that we have forgotten that we are connected to
Krsna. Because of this forgetfulness, we have entered the criminal
department of the universe. The government still takes care of its
criminals, but they are legally disconnected from the civilian state.
Our disconnection is a result of our engaging in so many nonsensical activities instead of utilizing our senses in the performance of
our Krsna conscious duties.

Instead of thinking, ‘‘I am the eternal servant of God, or
Krsna,’” we are thinking, ‘‘I am the servant of my society, my
country, my husband, my wife, my dog, or whatever.’’ This is
called forgetfulness. How has this come about? All these misconceptions have arisen due to this body. Because I was born in
America, I am thinking that | am an American. Each society
teaches its citizens to think in this way. Because [ am thinking that
Iam an American, the American government can tell me, ‘‘Come
and fight. Give your life for your country.’ This is all due to the
bodily conception; therefore an intelligent person should know
that he is suffering miseries due to his body and that he should not
act in such a way that he will continue to be imprisoned within a
material body birth after birth. According to Padma Purana, there
are 8,400,000 species of life, and all are but different forms of contamination—whether one has an American body, an Indian body,
a dog’s body, a hog’s body, or whatever. Therefore the first instruction in yoga is, ‘‘I am not this body.”

Attaining liberation from the contamination of the material
body is the first teaching of Bhagavad-gita. In the Second Chapter,
after Arjuna told Sri Krsna, ‘‘I shall not fight,’’ the Lord said,
‘While speaking learned words, you are mourning for what is not
worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living
nor the dead.”” (Bg. 2.11) In other words, Arjuna was thinking on
the bodily platform. He wanted to leave the battlefield because he
did not want to fight with his relatives. All his conceptions were
within the bodily atmosphere; therefore after Arjuna accepted Sri
 

 

56 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Krsna as his spiritual master, the Lord immediately chastised him,
just as a master chastises his disciple in order to teach him. Essentially, Sri Krsna told Arjuna, ‘‘You are talking very wisely, as if
you Know so many things, but actually you are speaking nonsense,
because you are speaking from the bodily position.’’ Similarly,
people throughout the world are posing themselves as highly advanced in education, science, philosophy, politics, etc., but their
position is on the bodily platform.

A vulture may rise very high in the sky—seven or eight
miles—and it is wonderful to see him fly in this way. He also has
powerful eyes, for he can spot a carcass from a great distance. Yet
what is the object of all these great qualifications? A dead body, a
rotting carcass. His perfection is just to discover a dead piece of
meat and eat it. That’s all. Similarly, we may have a very high
education, but what is our objective? Sense enjoyment, the enjoyment of this material body. We may rise very high with our spaceships, but what is the purpose? Sense gratification, that’s all. This
means that all the striving and all this high education are merely
on the animal platform.

Therefore we should first of all know that our miserable material condition is due to this body. At the same time, we should
Know that this body is not permanent. Although I identify with my
body, family, society, country, and so many other things, how
long will these objects exist? They are not permanent. Asat is a
word meaning that they will cease to exist. Asann api klesada asa
dehah: **The body is simply troublesome and impermanent.”’

Many people come to us saying, ‘‘Svamiji, my position is so
troublesome,”’ but as soon as we suggest the medicine, they will
not accept it. This means that people want to manufacture their
own medicine. Why do we go to a physician if we want to treat
ourselves? People want to accept only what they think is palatable.

Although we are suggesting that this body is useless and Is a
form of contamination, we are not recommending that it be
abused. We may use a car to carry us to work, but this does not
mean that we should not take care of the car. We should take care
of the car for it to carry us to and fro, but we should not become so
attached to it that we are polishing it every day. We must utilize
this material body in order to execute Krsna consciousness, and to

Moderation in Yoga 57

this end we should keep it fit and healthy, but we should not become too attached to it. That is called yukta-vairagya. The body
should not be neglected. We should bathe regularly, eat regularly,
sleep regularly in order to keep mind and body healthy. Some
people say that the body should be renounced and that we should
take some drugs and abandon ourselves to intoxication, but this is
not a yoga process. Krsna has given us nice food—fruits, grains,
vegetables, and milk—and we can prepare hundreds and thousands of nice preparations and offer them to the Lord. Our process
is to eat Arsna-prasada and to satisfy the tongue in that way. But we
should not be greedy and eat dozens of samosas, sweetballs, and
rasagullas. No. We should eat and sleep just enough to keep the
body fit, and no more. It is stated,

yuktahara-viharasya
yukta-cestasya karmasu

yukta-svapnavabodhasya
yogo bhavati duhkha-ha

‘*‘He who is temperate in his habits of eating, sleeping, working,
and recreation can mitigate all material pains by practicing the
yoga system.”’ (Bg. 6.17)

Although we should minimize our eating and sleeping, we
should not attempt this too rapidly, at the risk of becoming sick.
Because people are accustomed to eating voraciously, there are
prescriptions for fasting. We can reduce our sleeping and eating,
but we should remain in good health for spiritual purposes. We
should not attempt to reduce eating and sleeping too rapidly or artificially, when we advance we will naturally not feel pain due to
the reduction of these natural bodily processes. In this respect,
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami offers a good example. Although a
very rich man’s son, Raghunatha dasa left his home to join Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Because he was the only son, Raghunatha
dasa was very beloved by his father. Understanding that his son
had gone to Jagannatha Puri to join Lord Caitanya, the father sent
four servants with money to attend him. At first, Raghunatha accepted the money, thinking, ‘‘Oh, since my father has sent all this
money, I will accept it and invite all the sannyasis to feast.”’
 

58 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

After some time, however, the feasts came to an end. Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu then inquired from His secretary, Svartipa
Damodara, ‘“‘Nowadays I don’t receive any invitations from
Raghunatha. What has happened?”’

*“That is because Raghunatha has stopped accepting his
father’s money.”

‘Oh, that’s very nice,’’ Caitanya Mahaprabhu said.

‘“Raghunatha was thinking, ‘Although I have renounced
everything, I am still enjoying my father’s money. This is.hypocritical.” Therefore he has told the servants to go home and has
refused the money.”’

**So how is he living?’’ Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquired.

‘Oh, he’s standing on the steps of the Jagannatha temple, and
when the priests pass him on their way home, they offer him some
prasada. \n this way, he is satisfied.”

‘*This is very nice,’’ Caitanya Mahadprabhu commented.

Regularly going to the Jagannatha temple, Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu would see Raghunatha standing on the steps. After a
few days, however, He no longer saw him there. Therefore the
Lord commented to His secretary, ‘‘I no longer see Raghunatha
Standing on the temple steps.”

‘*He has given that up,’’ Svaripa Damodara explained. ‘He
was thinking, ‘Oh, I am standing here just like a prostitute, waiting for someone to come and give me food. No. I don’t like this
at all.’””

‘‘That is very nice,’’ Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, ‘‘but how is
he eating?”

‘Every day he is collecting some rejected rice from the kitchen
and is eating that.”’

To encourage Raghunatha, Caitanya Mahaprabhu one day
visited him. ‘“‘Raghunatha,”’ the Lord said, “‘I hear that you are
eating very palatable food. Why are you not inviting Me?”’

Raghunatha did not reply, but the Lord quickly found the place
where he kept the rice, and the Lord immediately took some and
began to eat it.

‘*Dear Lord,’ Raghunatha implored, “‘please do not eat this. It
is not fit for You.”

 

Moderation in Yoga : 59

““Oh, no? Why do you say it’s not fit for Me? It’s Lord Jagannatha’s prasada}”’

Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu enacted this pastime just to discourage Raghunatha from thinking, ‘‘I am eating this miserable,
rejected rice.” Through the Lord’s encouragement, Raghunatha
dasa Gosvami reduced his daily quantity of food until he was
finally eating only one pat of butter every other day. And every
day he was also bowing down hundreds of times and constantly
chanting the holy names. Sankhyd-purvaka-nama-gana-natibhih
kalavasani-krtau.

Although this is an excellent example of minimizing all material necessities, we should not try to imitate it. It is not possible
for an ordinary man to imitate Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, who
was one of the six Gosvamis, a highly elevated associate of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself. Each one of the six Gosvamis displayed a unique example of how one can advance in Krsna consciousness, but it is not our duty to imitate them. We should just
try to follow, as far as possible, in their footsteps. If we immediately try to become like Raghunatha dasa Gosvami by imitating him, we are sure to fail, and whatever progress we have made
will be defeated. Therefore the Lord says (Bg. 6.16) that there is
no possibility of one’s becoming a yogi if one eats too much or too
little.

The same moderation applies to sleep. Presently I may be
sleeping ten hours a day, but if I can keep myself fit by sleeping
five hours, why sleep ten? As far as the body is concerned, there
are four demands—eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. The
problem with modern civilization is that it is trying to increase
these demands, but they should be decreased instead. Eat what we
need, and sleep when we need, and our health will be excellent.
There is no question of artificial imitation.

And what is the result obtained by one who is temperate in his
habits?

yada viniyatam cittam
atmany evavatisthate

nisprhah sarva-kamebhyo
yukta ity ucyate tada
 

60 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

‘‘When the yogi, by practice of yoga, disciplines his mental activities and becomes situated in Transcendence—devoid of all material desires—he is said to have attained yoga.”” (Bg. 6.18)

The perfection of yoga means keeping the mind in a state of
equilibrium. Materially speaking, this is impossible. After reading
a mundane novel once, you will not want to read it again, but you
can read Bhagavad-gita four times a day and still not tire of it. You
may chant someone’s name a half an hour, or sing a mundane

song three or four times, but before long this becomes tiresome.
Hare Krsna, however, can be chanted day and night, and one will
never tire of it. Therefore it is only through transcendental vibration that the mind can be kept in a state of equilibrium. When
one’s mental activities are thus stabilized, one is said to have attained yoga.

The perfectional stage of yoga was exhibited by King Ambarisa, who utilized all his senses in the service of the Lord. As

stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.18-20),

sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor
vacamsi vaikuntha-gunanuvarnane

karau harer mandira-marjanadisu
srutim cakaracyuta-sat-kathodaye

mukunda-lingalaya-darsane drsau
tad-bhrtya-gatra-sparse ‘nga-sangamam

ghranam ca tat-pada-saroja-saurabhe
Srimat-tulasya rasanam tad-arpite

padau hareh ksetra-padanusarpane
siro hrsikesa-padabhivandane

kamam ca dasye na tu kama-kamyaya
yathottamasloka-janasraya ratih

‘**King Ambarisa first of all engaged his mind on the lotus feet of
Lord Krsna; then, one after another, he engaged his words in describing the transcendental qualities of the Lord, his hands in
mopping the temple of the Lord, his ears in hearing of the ac
 

 

Moderation in Yoga 61

tivities of the Lord, his eyes in seeing the transcendental forms of
the Lord, his body in touching the bodies of the devotees, his
sense of smell in smelling the scents of the lotus flowers offered to
the Lord, his tongue in tasting the tulasileaf offered at the temple
of the Lord, his head in offering obeisances unto the Lord, and his
desires in executing the mission of the Lord. All these transcendental activities are quite befitting a pure devotee.”

This, then, is the perfection of yoga devoid of all material
desire. If all our desires are for Krsna, there is no scope for material desire. All material desire is automatically finished. We
don’t have to try to concentrate artificially. All perfection is there
in Krsna consciousness because it is on the spiritual platform.
Being on the spiritual platform, this supreme yoga is eternal,
blissful, and full of knowledge. Therefore there are no misgivings
or material impediments.
 

 

CHAPTER FIVE

Determination and Steadiness in Yoga

yatha dipo nivata-stho
nengate sopama smrta

yogino yata-cittasya
yunjato yogam atmanah

**As a lamp in a windless place does not waver, so the transcendentalist, whose mind is controlled, remains always steady in his
meditation on the transcendent Self.’ (Bg. 6.19)

If the mind its absorbed in Krsna consciousness, it will remain
as steady as the flame of a candle that is in a room where there is
no wind. Therefore it is said that a truly Krsna conscious person
always absorbed in transcendence, in constant undisturbed meditation on his worshipable Lord, is as steady as a lamp or candie in a windless place. Just as the flame is not agitated, the mind
is not agitated, and that steadiness is the perfection of yoga.

The state of one thus steadily situated in meditation on the
transcendent Self, or the Supreme Lord, is described by Sri Krsna
in the following verses of Bhagavad-gita (6.20-23):

yatroparamate cittam
niruddham yoga-sevaya

yatra caivatmanatmanam
pasyann atmani tusyati

sukham atyantikam yat tad
buddhi-grahyam atindriyam

vetti yatra na caivayam
sthitas calati tattvatah

63
64 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

yam labdhva caparam labham
manyate nadhikam tatah

yasmin sthito na duhkhena
gurunapi vicalyate

tam vidyad duhkha-samyogaviyogam yoga-samjnitam

‘‘The stage of perfection is called trance, or samadhi, when one’s
mind is completely restrained from material mental activities by
practice of yoga. This is characterized by one’s ability to see the
Self by the pure mind and to relish and rejoice in the Self. In that
joyous state, one is situated in boundless transcendental happiness and enjoys himself through transcendental senses. Established thus, one never departs from the truth, and upon
gaining this he thinks there is no greater gain. Being situated in
such a position, one is never shaken, even in the midst of greatest
difficulty. This indeed is actual freedom from all miseries arising
from material contact.”’

Samadhi does not mean making oneself void or merging into
the void. That is impossible. Kleso ‘dhikataras tesam avyaktasaktacetasam. Some yogis say that one has to put an end to all activities
and make himself motionless, but how is this possible? By nature,
the living entity is a moving, acting spirit. ‘‘Motionless’’ means
putting an end to material motion and being fixed in Krsna consciousness. In such a state, one is no longer disturbed by material
propensities. AS one becomes materially motionless, one’s motions in Krsna consciousness increase. As one becomes active in
Krsna consciousness, one becomes automatically motionless in
respect to material activities.

I have often used the example of a restless child. Since it is impossible to make such a child motionless, it is necessary to give
him some playthings or some pictures to look at. In this way, he
will be engaged, or motionless in the sense that he will not be
committing some mischief. But if one really wants to make him
motionless, one must give him some engagement in Krsna consciousness. Then there will be no scope for mischievous activities,
due to realization in Krsna consciousness. To be engaged in Krsna

 

Determination and Steadiness in Yoga 65

consciousness, one should first realize, ‘‘I am Krsna’s. I am not
this matter. I am not of this nation or of this society. I do not
belong to this rascal or that rascal. I am simply Krsna’s.”’ This is
motionless; this is full knowledge, realizing our actual position as
part and parcel of Krsna. As stated in the Fifteenth Chapter
(Bg. 15.7), mamaivamso jiva-loke: ‘‘The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental parts.’ As soon as we
understand this, we immediately cease our material activities, and
this is what is meant by being motionless. In this state, one sees
the Self by the pure mind and relishes and rejoices in the Self.
‘‘Pure mind’? means understanding, ‘‘I belong to Krsna.”’ At the
present moment, the mind is contaminated because we are thinking, ‘‘I belong to this; I belong to that.’ The mind is pure when it
understands, ‘‘I belong to Krsna.”

Rejoicing in the Self means rejoicing with Krsna. Krsna is the
Supersoul, or the Superself. I am the individual soul, or the individual self. The Superself and the self enjoy together. Enjoyment cannot be alone; there must be two. What experience do we
have of solitary enjoyment? Solitary enjoyment is not possible.
Enjoyment means two: Krsna, who is the Supersoul, and the individual soul.

If one is convinced that ‘‘I am part and parcel of Krsna,’’ one is
not disturbed even in the midst of the greatest difficulties, because
one knows that Krsna will give protection. That is surrender. To
attain this position, one must try his best, use his intelligence,
and believe in Krsna. Balasya neha saranam pitarau nrsimha
(Bhag. 7.9.19). If Krsna does not protect us, nothing can save us.
If Krsna neglects us, there is no remedy, and whatever measures
we take to try to protect ourselves will be ultimately defeated.
There may be many expert physicians treating a diseased man, but
that is no guarantee that he will live. If Krsna so wills, a person will
die despite the best physicians and medicines. On the other hand,
if Krsna is protecting us, we will survive even without medical
treatment. When one is fully surrendered to Krsna, he becomes
happy, knowing that regardless of the situation, Krsna will protect
him. He is just like a child who is fully surrendered to his parents,
confident that they are there to protect him. As stated by
66 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Yamunacarya in his Stotra-ratna (43), kadaham aikantika-nityakinkarah praharsayisyami sanatha-jivitam: ‘‘O Lord, when shall I
engage as Your permanent, eternal servant and always feel joyful
to have such a perfect master?’’ If we know that there is someone
very powerful who is our patron and savior, aren’t we happy? But
if we try to act on our own and at our own risk, how can we be
happy? Happiness means being in Krsna consciousness and being
convinced that ‘“‘Krsna will give me protection,”’ and being true to
Krsna. It is not possible to be happy otherwise.

Of course, Krsna is giving all living entities protection, even in
their rebellious condition (eko bahiinadm yo vidadhati kaman).
Without Krsna’s protection, we cannot live for a second. When we
admit.and recognize Krsna’s kindness, we become happy. Krsna is
protecting us at every moment, but we do not realize this, because
we have taken life at our own risk. Krsna gives us a certain amount
of freedom, saying, ‘‘All right, do whatever you like. As far as
possible, I will give you protection.’’ However, when the living
entity is fully surrendered to Krsna, Krsna takes total charge and
gives special protection. If a child grows up and doesn’t care for his
father and acts freely, what can his father do? He can only say,
‘*‘Do whatever you like.’’ But when a son puts himself fully under
his father’s protection, he receives more care. As Krsna states in
the Ninth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita (9.29),

samo ‘ham sarva-bhutesu
na me dvesyo ’sti na priyah
ye bhajanti tu mam bhaktya
mayi te tesu capy aham

‘‘T envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But
whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me,
and I am also a friend to him.”

How can Krsna be envious of anyone? Everyone is Krsna’s
son. Similarly, how can Krsna be an enemy toward anyone? Since
all living entities are Krsna’s sons, He is everyone’s friend. Unfortunately, we are not taking advantage of His friendship, and that is
our disease. Once we recognize Krsna as our eternal father and

 

Determination and Steadiness in Yoga 67

friend, we can understand that He is always protecting us, and in
this way we can be happy.

sa niScayena yoktavyo
yogo ‘nirvinna-cetasa
sankalpa-prabhavan kamams
tyaktva sarvan asesatah
manasaivendriya-gramam
viniyamya samantatah

“One should engage oneself in the practice of yoga with undeviating determination and faith. One should abandon, without exception, all material desires born of false ego and thus control all the
senses on all sides by the mind.” (Bg. 6.24)

As stated before, this determination can be attained only by
one who does not indulge in sex. Celibacy makes one’s determination strong; therefore, from the very beginning Krsna states
that the yogidoes not engage in sex. If one indulges in sex, one’s
determination will be flickering. Therefore sex life should be controlled according to the rules and regulations governing the
grhastha-asrama, or sex should be given up altogether. Actually, it
should be given up altogether, but if this is not possible, it should
be controlled. Then determination will come because, after all,
determination is a bodily affair. Determination means continuing
to practice Krsna consciousness with patience and perseverance. If
one does not immediately attain the desired results, one should
not think, ‘‘Oh, what is this Krsna consciousness? I will give it
up.”’ No, we must have determination and faith in Krsna’s words.

In this regard, there is a mundane example. When a young girl
gets married, she immediately hankers for a child. She thinks,
‘©Now Iam married. I must have a child immediately.’” But how is
this possible? The girl must have patience, become a faithful wife,
serve her husband, and let her love grow. Eventually, because she
is married, it is certain that she will have a child. Similarly, when
we are in Krsna consciousness, our perfection is guaranteed, but
we must have patience and determination. We should think, “‘I
must execute my duties andshould not be impatient.”’ Impatience
 

68 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

is due to loss of determination, and loss of determination is due to
excessive Sex.

The yogishould be determined and should patiently prosecute
Krsna consciousness without deviation. One should be sure of
success at the end and pursue this course with great perseverance,
not becoming discouraged if there is any delay in the attainment of
success. Success is sure for the rigid practitioner. Regarding
bhakti-yoga, Rupa Gosvami says, :

utsahan niscayad dhairyat
tat-tat-karma-pravartanat

sanga-tyagat sato vrtteh
sadbhir bhaktih prasidhyati

‘‘The process of bhakti-yoga can be executed successfully with
full-hearted enthusiasm, perseverance, and determination by
following the prescribed duties in the association of devotees and by engaging completely in activities of goodness.”’
( Upadesamrta 3)

As for determination, one should follow the example of the
sparrow who lost her eggs in the waves of the ocean. A sparrow
laid her eggs on the shore of the ocean, but the big ocean carried
away the eggs on its waves. The sparrow became very upset and
asked the ocean to return her eggs. The ocean did not even consider her appeal. So the sparrow decided to dry up the ocean. She
began to pick out the water in her small beak, and everyone
laughed at her for her impossible determination. The news of her
activity spread, and when at last Garuda, the gigantic bird carrier
of Lord Visnu, heard it, he became compassionate toward his
Small sister bird, and so he came to see her. Garuda was very
pleased by the determination of the small sparrow, and he promised to help. Thus Garuda at once asked the ocean to return her
eggs lest he himself take up the work of the sparrow. The ocean
was frightened by this, and returned the eggs. Thus the sparrow
became happy by the grace of Garuda.

Similarly, the practice of yoga, especially bhakti-yoga in Krsna
consciousness, may appear to be a very difficult job. But if anyone

 

Determination and Steadiness in Yoga 69

follows the principles with great determination, the Lord will
surely help, for God helps those who help themselves.

Sanaih sanair uparamed
buddhya dhrti-grhitaya

atma-samstham manah krtva
na kincid api cintayet

‘Gradually, step by step, with full conviction, one should become
situated in trance by means of intelligence, and thus the mind
should be fixed on the Self alone and should think of nothing
else.”” (Bg. 6.25) | |

We are the self, and Krsna is also the Self. When there is
sunlight, we can see the sun and ourselves also. However, when
there is dense darkness, we sometimes cannot even see our own
body. Although the body is there, the darkness is so dense that I
cannot see myself. But when the sunshine is present, I can see
myself as well as the sun. Similarly, seeing the self means first of
all seeing the Supreme Self, Krsna. In the Katha Upanisad it is
stated, nityo nityandm cetanas cetandnam: ‘‘The Supreme Self is
the chief eternal of all eternals, and He is the chief living being of
all living beings.’ Krsna consciousness means fixing the mind on
Krsna, and when the mind is thus fixed, it is fixed on the complete
whole. If the stomach is cared for and supplied nutritious food, all
the bodily limbs are nourished, and we are in good health.
Similarly, if we water the root of a tree, all the branches, leaves,
flowers, and twigs are automatically taken care of. By rendering
service to Krsna, we automatically render the best service to all
others.

As stated before, a Krsna conscious person does not sit down
idly. He knows that Krsna consciousness is such an important philosophy that it should be distributed. Therefore the members of
this Krsna consciousness society are not just sitting in the temple
but are going out on sankirtana parties, preaching and distributing
this supreme philosophy. That is the mission of Sti Krsna
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His disciples. Other yogis may be
satisfied with their own elevation and sit in secluded places,
70 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

practicing yoga. For them, yoga is nothing more than their personal concern. A devotee, however, is not satisfied just in elevating his personal self.

vanicha-kalpatarubhyas ca
krpa-sindhubhya eva ca

patitanam pavanebhyo
vaisnavebhyo namo namah

**T offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaisnava devotees
of the Lord, who can fulfill the desires of everyone, just like desire
trees, and who are full of compassion for the fallen souls.”? A
devotee displays great compassion toward conditioned souls. The
word ‘Arpa means ‘‘mercy,”’ and sindhu means ‘tocean.’’ A devotee is an ocean of mercy, and he naturally wants to distribute this
mercy. Lord Jesus Christ, for instance, was God conscious, Krsna
conscious, but he was not satisfied in keeping this knowledge
within himself. Had he continued to live alone in God consciousness, he would not have met crucifixion. But no. Being a devotee
and naturally compassionate, he also wanted to take care of others
by making them God conscious. Although he was forbidden to
preach God consciousness, he continued to do so at the risk of his
own life. This is the nature of a devotee.

It is therefore stated in Bhagavad-gita (18.68-69) that the
devotee who preaches is most dear to the Lord.

ya idam paramam guhyam
mad-bhaktesv abhidhasyati

bhaktim mayi param krtva
mam evaisyaty asamsayah

**For one who explains the supreme secret to the devotees, devotional service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back
to Me.”
na ca tasman manusyesu
kascin me priya-krttamah
bhavita na ca me tasmad
anyah priyataro bhuvi

 

Determination and Steadiness in Yoga 71

‘‘There is no servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor
will there ever be one more dear.’’ Therefore the devotees go out
to preach, and going forth, they sometimes meet opposing elements. Sometimes they are defeated, sometimes disappointed,
sometimes able to convince, sometimes unable. It is not that every devotee is well equipped to preach. Just as there are different
types of people, there are three classes of devotees. In the third
class are those who have no faith. If they are engaged in devotional service officially, for some ulterior purpose, they cannot
achieve the highest perfectional stage. Most probably they will
slip, after some time. They may become engaged, but because
they haven’t complete conviction and faith, it is very difficult for
them to continue in Krsna consciousness. We have practical experience in discharging our missionary activity that some people
come and apply themselves to Krsna consciousness with some
hidden motive, and as soon as they are economically a little well
Situated, they give up this process and take to their old ways again.
It is only by faith that one can advance in Krsna consciousness. As
far as the development of faith is concerned, one who is well
versed in the literatures of devotional service and has attained the
stage of firm faith is called a first-class person in Krsna consciousness. And in the second class are those who are not very advanced
in understanding the devotional scriptures but who automatically
have firm faith that krsna-bhakti, or service to Krsna, is the best
course and so in good faith have taken it up. Thus they are
superior to the third class, who have neither perfect knowledge of
the scriptures nor good faith but by association and simplicity are
trying to follow. The third-class person in Krsna consciousness
may fall down, but when one is in the second class or first class, he
does not fall down. One in the first class will surely make progress
and achieve the result at the end. As far as the third-class person
in Krsna consciousness is concerned, although he has faith
in the conviction that devotional service to Krsna is very good, he
has no knowledge of Krsna through the scriptures like the
Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita. Sometimes these thirdclass persons in Krsna consciousness have some tendency toward
karma-yoga and jfana-yoga, and sometimes they are disturbed,
72 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

but as soon as the infection of kKarma-yoga or jndna-yoga is vanquished, they become second-class or first-class persons in Krsna
consciousness. Faith in Krsna is also divided into three stages and
described in Srimad-Bhagavatam. First-class attachment, secondclass attachment, and third-class attachment are also explained in
Srimad-Bhagavatam, in the Eleventh Canto.

_ However one ts situated, one should have the determination to
go out and preach Krsna consciousness. That endeavor should at

least be there, and one who so attempts to preach renders the best .

service to the Lord. Despite opposition, one should attempt to
elevate people to the highest standard of self-realization. One who
has actually seen the truth, who is in the trance of self-realization,
cannot just sit idly. He must come out. Ramanujacarya, for inStance, declared the Hare Krsna mantra publicly. He did not distribute it secretly for some fee. Recently, an Indian yogi came to
America to give some “‘private mantra.’’ But if a mantra has any
power, why should it be private? If a mantra is powerful, why
Should it not be publicly declared so that everyone can take advantage of it? We are saying that this Hare Krsna maha-mantra can
Save everyone, and we are therefore distributing it publicly, free
of charge. But in this age, people are so foolish that they are not
prepared to accept it. Rather, they hanker after some secret
mantra and therefore pay some “‘yogi’’ thirty-five dollars or whatever for some ‘‘private mantra.’’ This is because people want to be
cheated. But the devotees are preaching without charge, declaring
in the streets, parks, and everywhere, ‘‘Here! Here is the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra. Come on, take it!’’ But under the spell of
maya, illusion, people are thinking, ‘Oh, this is not good.’’ But if
you charge something and bluff and cheat people, they will follow
you.

In this regard, there is a Hindi verse stating that Kali-yuga is
such an abominable age that if one speaks the truth, people will
come and beat him. But if one cheats, bluffs, and lies, people will
be bewildered, will like it, and will accept it. If I say, ‘‘I am God,”’
people will say, ‘‘Oh, here is Svamijt. Here is God.”’ In this age,
people don’t have sufficient brain power to inquire, ‘‘How have
you become God? What are the symptoms of God? Do you have

 

Determination and Steadiness in Yoga 73

all these symptoms?”’ Because people do not make such inquiries,
they are cheated. Therefore it is necessary to be fixed in consciousness of the Self. Unless one knows and understands the real
self and the Superself, one will be cheated. Real yoga means
understanding this process of self-realization.

yato yato niscalati
manas caficalam asthiram
tatas tato niyamyaitad
atmany eva vasam nayet

‘‘Erom whatever and wherever the mind wanders due to its
flickering and unsteady nature, one must certainly withdraw it and
bring it back under the control of the Self.” (Bg. 6.26) This is the
real yogic process. If you are trying to concentrate your mind on
Krsna, and the mind is diverted—wandering to some cinema of
wherever—you should withdraw the mind, thinking, “‘Not there,
please. Here.” This is yoga. not allowing the mind to wander from
Krsna. | |

Very intense training is required to keep the mind fixed on
Krsna while sitting in one place. That is very hard work indeed. If
one is not so practiced and tries to imitate this process, he will
surely be confused. Instead, we always have to engage ourselves
‘n Krsna consciousness, dovetailing everything we do to Krsna.
Our usual activities should be so molded that they are rendered
for Krsna’s sake. In this way the mind will remain fixed on Krsna.
As stated before, we should not try to sit down and stare at the tip
of our nose. At the present moment, attempts to engage in that
type of yoga are artificial. Rather, the recommended method is
chanting loudly and hearing Hare Krsna. Then, even if the mind is
diverted, it will be forced to concentrate on the sound vibration
“Krona.” It isn’t necessary to withdraw the mind from everything, it will automatically be withdrawn, because it will be concentrated on the sound vibration. If we hear an automobile pass,
our attention is automatically diverted. Similarly, if we constantly
chant Hare Krsna, our mind will automatically be fixed on Krsna,
although we are accustomed to think of so many other things.
 

74 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

The nature of the mind is flickering and unsteady. But a selfrealized yogi has to control the mind; the mind should not control
him. At the present moment, the mind is controlling us (go-ddsa).
The mind its telling us, ‘“‘Please, why not look at that beautiful
girl?’’ and so we look. It says, ‘‘Why not drink that nice liquor?”
and we say, ‘‘Yes.”’ It says, ‘“‘Why not smoke this cigarette?”
‘*Yes,’> we say. ‘“Why not go to this restaurant for such palatable
food? Why not do this? Why not do that?” In this way, the mind
is dictating, and we are following. Material life means being controlled by the senses, or the mind, which is the center of all the
senses. Being controlled by the mind means being controlled by
the senses, because the senses are the mind’s assistants. The
master mind dictates, ‘‘Go see that,’’ and the eyes, following the
directions of the mind, look at the sense object. The mind tells us
to go to acertain place, and the legs, under the mind’s directions,
carry us there. Thus, being under the direction of the mind means
coming under the control of the senses. If we can control the
mind, we will not be under the control of the senses. One who is
under the control of the senses is known as go-dasa. The word go
means ‘‘senses,’” and dasa means ‘‘servant.’’ One who is master
of the senses is called gosvami, because svami means ‘‘master.”’
_Therefore, one who has the title gosvami is one who has mastered
_ the senses. As long as one is servant of the senses, he cannot be
called a gosvami or svami. Unless one masters the senses, his acceptance of the title svami or gosvamiis just a form of cheating. It
was Ripa Gosvami who thus defined the meaning of the word
gosvami. Originally, Sanatana Gosvami and Rapa Gosvami were
not gosvamis but were government ministers. It was only when
they became disciples of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu that they became gosvamis. So gosvamiis not a hereditary title but a qualification. One becomes so qualified under the directions of a bona fide
Spiritual master. Only when one has attained perfection in sense
control can he be called a gosvamiand become a spiritual master in
his turn. Unless one can master the senses, he will simply be a
bogus spiritual master.

This is explained by Ripa Gosvami in his Upadesamrta (1):

Determination and Steadiness in Yoga TS

vaco vegam manasah krodha-vegam
jihva-vegam udaropastha-vegam

etan vegan yo visaheta dhirah
sarvam apimam prthivim sa sisyat

**A sober person who can tolerate the urge to speak, the mind’s
demands, the actions of anger, and the urges of the tongue, belly,
and genitals is qualified to make disciples all over the world.”’ In
this verse Ripa Gosvami mentions six ‘‘pushings’’ (vegam). This
pushing is a kind of impetus. For instance, when nature calls, we
have to go to the toilet, and we cannot check this urge. So this
urge is called vegam, a kind of pushing. According to Rupa
Gosvami, there are six vegams. Vaco vegam is the urge to talk unnecessarily. That is a kind of pushing of the tongue. Then there is
krodha-vegam, the urge to become angry. When we are pushed to
anger, we cannotcheck ourselves, and sometimes men become so
angry that they commit murder. Similarly, the mind is pushing,
dictating, ‘‘You must go there at once,’’ and we immediately go
where we are told. The word jihva-vegam refers to the tongue’s
being urged to taste palatable foods. Udara-vegam refers to the
urges of the belly. Although the belly is full, it still wants more
food, and that is a kind of pushing of the belly. And when we yield
to the pushings of the tongue and the belly, the urges of the
genitals become very strong, and sex is required. If one does not
control his mind or his tongue, how can he control his genitals? In
this way, there are so many pushings, so much so that the body is
a kind of pushing machine. Ripa Gosvami therefore tells us that
One can become a spiritual master only when he can control all
these urges.

Etan vegan yo visaheta dhirah sarvam apimam prthivim sa Sisyat:
**One who can control the pushings and remain steady can make
disciples all over the world.’’ The word dhira means ‘‘steady,
sober.’’ Only one who is a dhira is qualified to make disciples. This
all depends on one’s training. Indeed, yoga means training the
mind and the senses to be fixed on the Self. This is not possible by
meditating only fifteen minutes a day and then going out and
 

 

 

76 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

doing whatever the senses dictate. How can the problems of life be
solved so cheaply? If we want something precious, we have to pay
for it. By the grace of Lord Caitanya, this payment has been made
very easy—just chant Hare Krsna. By our chanting, this system of
control, this yoga system, becomes perfected. [hd haite sarva siddhi
haibe tomara. Thus Lord Caitanya has blessed us. Simply by chanting Hare Krsna, we will achieve the perfection of self-realization.
In this age of Kali-yuga, when people are so fallen, other processes
will not be successful. This is the only process, and it is easy,
sublime, effective, and practical. By it, one can realize oneself.

According to Krsna in the Ninth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita
(9.2), this process is the most sublime.

raja-vidya raja-guhyam
— pavitram idam uttamam
pratyaksavagamam dharmyam
susukham kartum avyayam

“This knowledge is the king of education, the most secret of all
secrets. It is the purest knowledge, and because it gives direct perception of the self by realization, it is the perfection of religion. It
is everlasting, and it is joyfully performed.”’

-- After eating, a man can understand that his hunger has been
satisfied; similarly, by following the principles of Krsna consciousness, one can understand that he has advanced in self-realization.

CHAPTER SIX

Perception of the Supersoul

prasanta-manasam hy enam
yoginam sukham uttamam

upaiti Santa-rajasam
brahma-bhutam akalmasam

‘“‘The yogi whose mind is fixed on Me verily attains the highest
happiness. By virtue of his identity with Brahman, he is liberated;
his mind is peaceful, his passions are quieted, and he is freed from
sin.” (Bg. 6.27)

yunjann evam sadatmanam
yogi vigata-kalmasah

sukhena brahma-samsparsam
atyantam sukham asnute

‘*Steady in the Self, being freed from all material contamination,
the yogi achieves the highest perfectional stage of happiness in
touch with the Supreme Consciousness.” (Bg. 6.28)

So here is the perfection: ‘‘The yogi whose mind is fixed on
Me.”’ Since Krsna is speaking, the ‘‘Me’”’ refers to Krsna. If I am
speaking and saying, ‘“‘Give me a glass of water,’ I do not intend
that the water be supplied to someone else. We must therefore
clearly understand that, since Bhagavad-gitd is being spoken by Sri
Krsna, when He says ‘‘unto Me,’’ He means unto Krsna. Unfortunately, there are many commentators who deviate from these
clear instructions. I do not know why; their motives are no doubt
nefarious.

71
 

 

78 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

sarva-bhuta-stham atmanam
sarva-bhutani catmani

iksate yoga-yuktatma
sarvatra sama-darsanah

‘**A true yogi observes Me in all beings, and also sees every being
in Me. Indeed, the self-realized man sees Me everywhere.”’
(Bg. 6.29) Sarva-bhuta-stham atmanam: ‘‘ A true yogiobserves Me
in all beings.’’ How is this possible? Some people say that all
beings are Krsna and that therefore there is no point in worshiping
Krsna separately. Consequently, such people take to humanitarian
activities, claiming that such work is better. They say, ‘‘Why
should Krsna be worshiped? Krsna says that one should see Krsna
in every being. Therefore let us serve daridra-narayana, the man
in the street.’ Such misinterpreters do not know the proper tech
niques, which have to be learned under a bona fide spiritual

master.

A true yogi, as explained before, is the devotee of Krsna, and
the most advanced devotee goes forth to preach Krsna consciousness. Why? Because he sees Krsna in all beings. How is this? Because he sees that all beings are part and parcel of Krsna. He also
understands that since these beings have forgotten Krsna, it is his

duty to awaken them to Krsna consciousness. Sometimes mis
sionaries go forth to educate primitive, uneducated people just because they see that they are human beings and so deserve to be
educated in order to understand the value of life. This is due to the
missionary’s sympathy. The devotee is similarly motivated. He
understands that everyone should know himself to be part and
parcel of Krsna. The devotee understands that people are suffering due to their forgetfulness of Krsna.

Thus the devotee sees Krsna in everything. He is not under the
illusion that everything has become Krsna. Rather, he sees every
living being as the son of God. If I say that this boy is the son of
Mr. Johnson, do I mean that this boy is Mr. Johnson himself? I
may see Mr. Johnson in this boy because this boy is his son, but
the distinction remains. If I see every living being as the son of
Krsna, I see Krsna in every being. This should not be difficult to

Perception of the Supersoul 719

understand. It is neither an association nor a vision but a fact.

When a devotee sees a cat or a dog, he sees Krsna in him. He
knows that a cat, for instance, is a living being, and that due to his
past deeds he has received the body of a cat. This is due to his
forgetfulness. The devotee helps the cat by giving it some krsnaprasada so that someday the cat will come to Krsna consciousness.
This is seeing Krsna in the cat. The devotee does not think, *‘Oh,
here is Krsna. Let me embrace this cat and serve this cat as God.”’
Such thinking is nonsensical. If one sees a tiger, he does not say,
‘‘Oh, here is Krsna. Come one, please eat me.’’ The devotee does
not embrace all beings as Krsna but rather sympathizes with every
living being because he sees all beings as part and parcel of Krsna.
In this way, “‘the true yogi observes Me in all beings.’’ This is real
vision.

Whatever is done in Krsna consciousness, knowingly or
unknowingly, will have its effect. Children who bow down or try
to vibrate Krsna’s names or clap during kKirtana are actually accumulating so much in their bank account of Krsna consciousness. Fire will act, whether one is a child or an adult. If a child
touches fire, the fire will burn. The fire does not say, ‘‘Oh, I will
not burn him. He is a child and does not know.”’ No, the fire will
always act as fire. Similarly, Krsna is the supreme spirit, and if a
child partakes in Krsna consciousness, he will be affected. Krsna
will act, whether the child knows or does not know. Every living
being should be given a chance to partake of Krsna consciousness
because Krsna is there and will act. Therefore everyone is being
invited to come and take prasada, bécause this prasada will someday take effect.

We should be careful not to make the mistake of thinking that
everyone is Krsna; rather, we should see Krsna in everyone.
Krsna is all-pervading. Why is He to be seen only in human
beings? As stated in Brahma-samhita, He is also present within the
atom: anddantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham. The word
paramanu means ‘‘atom,’’ and we should understand that Krsna is
present within every atom. °‘A true yogiobserves Me in all beings
and also sees every being in Me.’’ How does the yogi see every
being ‘‘in Me’’? This is possible because the true yogi knows that
80 | THE PATH OF PERFECTION

everything that we see is Krsna. We are sitting on this floor or on
this carpet, but in actuality we are sitting on Krsna. We should
know this to be a fact. How is this carpet Krsna? It is Krsna beCause it is made of Krsna’s energy. The Supreme Lord has various
energies, of which there are three primary divisions—material
energy, spiritual energy, and marginal energy. Parasya saktir
vividhaiva sruyate. We living entities are marginal energy, the material world is material energy, and the spiritual world is spiritual
energy. We are marginal energy in the sense that we can be either
Spiritually or materially situated. There is no third alternative;
either we become materialistic or spiritualistic.

As long as we are in the material world, we are seated on the
material energy, and therefore we are situated in Krsna, because
Krsna’s energy is not separate from Krsna. A flame contains both
heat and illumination, two energies. Neither the heat nor the 1llumination are separate from the flame; therefore in one sense
heat is fire, and illumination is fire, but they can be distinguished.
Similarly, this material energy is also Krsna, and although we are
thinking that we are sitting on this floor, we are actually sitting on
Krsna. Therefore it is stated, ‘“‘The self-realized man sees Me
everywhere.’ Seeing Krsna everywhere means seeing every living
being as well as everything else in relationship to Krsna. In the
Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita (7.8), Lord Krsna tells Arjuna
how He can be seen in various manifestations.

raso *ham apsu kaunteya
prabhasmi sasi-suryayoh

pranavah sarva-vedesu
Sabdah khe paurusam nrsu

‘““O son of Kunti [Arjuna], I am the taste of water, the light of the
sun and the moon, the syllable om in the Vedic mantras; | am the
sound in ether and ability in man.”

Water is drunk by all living entities, and is needed by birds,
beasts, and man. It is not only used for drinking, but for washing
and for cultivating plants as well. A soldier on the battlefield can
understand how important water is. When fighting, soldiers be
 

 

Perception of the Supersoul 8]

come thirsty, and if they have no water, they die. Once a person
has learned the philosophy of Bhagavad-gita, whenever he drinks
water, he sees Krsna. And when does a day pass when we do not
drink water? This is the way of Krsna consciousness. “‘I am the
light of the sun and the moon.”’ So whether in the day or the
night, we see either sunshine or moonshine. How, then, can we
forget Krsna? This, then, is the way of perfect yoga. We have to
see Krsna everywhere and at all times.

yo mam pasyati sarvatra
sarvam ca mayi pasyati

tasyaham na pranasyami
sa ca me na pranasyati

‘*For one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I
am never lost, nor is he ever lost to Me.”” (Bg. 6.30) This is sada
tad-bhava-bhavitah: always remembering Krsna. If we practice living in this way, we never lose Krsna and are never lost to Krsna,
and at the time of death we are therefore sure to go to Krsna. If we
are not lost to Krsna, where can we go but to Krsna? In the Ninth
Chapter, Krsna tells Arjuna, kKaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah
pranasyati (Bg. 9.31): ‘‘O son of Kuntt, declare it boldly that My
devotee never perishes.”’

Simply don’t lose sight of Krsna. That is the perfection of life.
We can forget everything else, but we should never forget Krsna.
If we can remember Krsna, we are the richest of men, even
though people may see us as very poor. Although Ripa Gosvami
and Sanatana Gosvami were learned scholars and very opulent
ministers, they adopted the poor life of mendicants. In his Sri Sadgosvamy-astaka (verse 4), Srinivasa Acarya thus describes the six
Gosvamis:

tyaktva turnam asesa-mandala-pati-srenim sada tucchavat
bhutva dina-ganesakau karunaya kaupina-kanthasritau

gopi-bhava-rasamrtabdhi-lahari-kallola-magnau muhur
vande riipa-sanatanau raghu-yugau Sri-jiva-gopalakau

‘I offer my respectful obeisances unto the six Gosvamis—Sri
82 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Rupa Gosvami, Sri Sandtana Gosvami, Sri Raghunatha Bhatta
Gosvami, Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, Sri Jiva Gosvami, and
Sti Gopala Bhatta Gosvami—who cast off all aristocratic association as insignificant. To deliver poor, conditioned souls, they accepted loincloths and became mendicants, but they were always
merged in the ecstatic ocean of the gopis’ love for Krsna, and they
were always bathing repeatedly in the waves of that ocean.”’
The words kaupina-kanthdasritau indicate that the Gosvamis
were simply wearing underwear and a loincloth and nothing else.
In other words, they accepted the poorest way of life as mendicants. Generally, if one is habituated to living according to a high
Standard, he cannot immediately lower his standard. If a rich man
accepts such a poor condition, he cannot live, but the Gosvamis
lived very happily. How was this possible? Gopi-bhavarasamrtabdhi-lahari-kallola-magnau muhurl vande riipa-sanatanau
raghu-yugau Sri-jiva-gopalakau. They were actually rich because
they were constantly dipping themselves in the ocean of the loving
affairs of the gopis. If one simply thinks of the gopis’ love for
Krsna, one is not lost. There are many ways not to lose sight of
Krsna. If we do not lose sight of Krsna, then we will not be lost.
A person in Krsna consciousness certainly sees Lord Krsna
everywhere, and he sees everything in Krsna. Such a person may
appear to see all separate manifestations of the material nature,
but in each and every instance he is conscious of Krsna, knowing
that everything is the manifestation of Krsna’s energy. Nothing
can exist without Krsna, and Krsna is the Lord of everything—
this is the basic principle of Krsna consciousness. How does the
devotee know that everything is the manifestation of Krsna’s energy? First of all, a Krsna conscious person is a philosopher. If he
sees a tree, he thinks, ‘‘What is this tree?’ He then sees that the
tree has a material body—just as he has a material body—and that
the tree is also a living entity, but due to the tree’s past misdeeds,
he has obtained such an abominable body that he cannot even
move. The tree’s body is material, material energy, and the devotee automatically questions, ‘‘Whose energy? Krsna’s energy.
Therefore the tree is connected to Krsna. Being a living entity, the
tree is part and parcel of Krsna.’’ In this way, the Krsna conscious

 

Perception of the Supersoul 83

person does not see the tree, but sees Krsna present. That is Krsna
consciousness: you don’t see the tree. You see Krsna. That is the
perfection of yoga, and that is also samadhi.

Krsna consciousness is the development of love of Krsna—a
position transcendental even to material liberation. Why does the
Krsna conscious person take such an account of the tree? Because
he has love for Krsna. If you love your child and your child is
away, you think of him when you see his shoes. You think, “Oh,
this is my dear child’s shoe.”” It is not that you love the shoe, but
the child. The shoe, however, evokes that love. Similarly, as soon
as we see Krsna’s energy manifested in a living entity, we love
that entity because we love Krsna. Therefore, if we love Krsna,
universal love is accounted for. Otherwise ‘‘universal love’’ is
nonsensical, because it is not possible to love everybody without
loving Krsna. If we love Krsna, universal love is automatically
there. Without being Krsna conscious, a person may say, “‘Here is
my American brother, and here is my Indian brother. Now let us
eat this cow.’ Such a person may look on other humans as
brothers, but he looks on the cow as food. Is this universal love?
A Krsna conscious person, however, thinks, “Oh, here is a cow.
Here is a dog. They are part and parcel of Krsna, but somehow or
other they have acquired different bodies. This does not mean that
they are not my brothers. How can I kill and eat my brothers?’”’
That is true universal love—rooted in love for Krsna. Without
such Krsna consciousness, there is no question of love at all.

Krsna consciousness is the stage beyond self-realization in
which the devotee becomes one with Krsna in the sense that
Krsna becomes everything for the devotee, and the devotee becomes full in loving Krsna. An intimate relationship between the
Lord and the devotee then exists. In that stage, the living entity
attains his immortality. Nor is the Personality of Godhead ever
out of sight of the devotee. To merge in Krsna is spiritual annihilation. A devotee takes no such risk. It is stated in the Brahmasamhita (5.38),

premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
84 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

yam syamasundaram acintya-guna-svariipam
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami

**] worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the
devotee whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen
in His eternal form of Syamasundara, situated within the heart of
the devotee.’’ One who has developed such a love for Krsna sees
Syamasundara, Kartamesdna, always within his heart. At this
stage, Lord Krsna never disappears from the sight of the devotee,
nor does the devotee ever lose sight of the Lord. In the case of a
yogi who sees the Lord as Paramatma within the heart, the same
applies. Such a yogi turns into a pure devotee and cannot bear to
live fora moment without seeing the Lord within himself.

This is the real process by which we can see God. God is not
our order supplier. We cannot demand, ‘‘Come and show Yourself.’’ No, we first have to qualify ourselves. Then we can see God
at every moment and everywhere.

sarva-bhuta-sthitam yo mam
bhajaty ekatvam asthitah
sarvatha vartamano ‘pi
sa yogi mayi vartate

**The yogi who knows that I and the Supersoul within all creatures
are one worships Me and remains always in Me in all circumstances.” (Bg. 6.31)

A yogi who is practicing meditation on the Supersoul sees
within himself the plenary portion of Krsna as Visnu—with four
hands, holding conchshell, wheel, club, and-lotus flower. This
manifestation of Visnu, which is the yogi's object of concentration,
is Krsna’s plenary portion. As stated in Brahma-samhita (5.48),

yasyaika-nisvasita-kalam athavalambya
jivanti loma-vila-ja jagad-anda-nathah

visnur mahan sa iha yasya kala-viseso
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami

 

 

Perception of the Supersoul 85

‘‘The Brahmas and other lords of the mundane worlds appear
from the pores of Maha-Visnu and remain alive for the duration of
His one exhalation. I adore the primeval Lord, Govinda, for
Maha-Visnu is a portion of His plenary portion.”’ The words govindam ddi-purusam tam aham bhajami (‘‘I worship Govinda, the
primeval Lord’’) are most important. The word ddi means
‘‘original,’> and purusam means ‘‘the Lord as the original male,
the original enjoyer.’> And who is this Govinda whose plenary
portion is the Maha-Visnu? And what is the function of the MahaVisnu?

In every universe there is a primary, original living entity
known as Brahma. The life of Brahma is the life of the universe,
and this life exists during only one breathing period (exhalation
and inhalation) of the Maha-Visnu. The Maha-Visnu lies on the
Causal Ocean, and when He exhales, millions of universes issue
from His body as bubbles and then develop. When the MahaVisnu inhales, these millions of universes return within Him, and
this is called the process of annihilation. That, in essence, is the
position of these material universes: they come out from the body
of the Maha-Visnu and then again return. In the Ninth Chapter of
Bhagavaa-gita (9.7) it is also indicated that these material universes are manifest at a certain period and are then annihilated.

sarva-bhutani kaunteya
prakrtim yanti mamikam

kalpa-ksaye punas tani
kalpadau visrjamy aham

‘“O son of Kuntt, at the end of the millennium, every material
manifestation enters into My nature, and at the beginning of
another millennium, by My potency I again create.’ The creation,
maintenance, and annihilation of this material cosmic manifestation are completely dependent on the supreme will of the Personality of Godhead. *‘At the end of the millennium’’ means at
the death of Brahma. Brahma lives for one hundred years, and his
one day is calculated at 4,300,000,000 of our earthly years. His
 

 

86 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

night is of the same duration. His month consists of thirty such
days and nights, and his year of twelve months. After one hundred
such years, when Brahma dies, the devastation or annihilation
takes place; this means that the energy manifested by the
Supreme Lord is again wound up in Himself. That is, the MahaVisnu inhales. Then again, when there is need to manifest the cosmic world, it is done by His will: ‘‘Although I am one, I shall
become many.”’ This is the Vedic aphorism. He expands Himself
in this material energy, and the whole cosmic manifestation again
takes place.

Since the entire creation and annihilation of the material universes depend on the exhaling and inhaling of the Maha-Visnu,
we can hardly imagine the magnitude of that Maha-Visnu. And
yet it is said here that this Maha-Visnu is but a plenary portion of
the plenary portion of Krsna, who is the original Govinda. The
Maha-Visnu enters into each universe as Garbhodakasayi Visnu,
and Garbhodakasayi Visnu further expands as Ksirodakasayi
Visnu, and it is this Visnu form that enters into the heart of every
living entity. In this way, Visnu is manifest throughout the creation. Thus the yogis concentrate their minds on the Ksirodakasayi
Visnu form within the heart. As stated in the last chapter of
Bhagavad-gita (18.61),

isvarah sarva-bhutanam
hrd-dese ‘rjuna tisthati

bhramayan sarva-bhutani
yantrarudhani mayaya

‘‘The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna,
and is directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are
seated as on a machine, made of the material energy.”

Thus, according to the yogic process, the yogi finds out where
the Ksirodakasayi Visnu is seated within the heart, and when he
finds this form there, he concentrates on Him. The yogi should
know that this Visnu is not different from Krsna. Krsna in this
form of Supersoul is situated in everyone’s heart. Furthermore,
there is no difference between the innumerable Supersouls pres
Arma

- Perception of the Supersoul | 87

ent in the innumerable hearts of living entities. For example,
there is only one sun in the sky, but this sun may be reflected in
millions of buckets of water. Or, one may ask millions and trillions
of people, ‘‘Where is the sun?’’ And each will say, ““Over my
head.’’ The sun is one, but it is reflected countless times. According to the Vedas, the living entities are innumerable; there is no
possibility of counting them. Just as the sun can be reflected in
countless buckets of water, Visnu, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, can live in each and everyone’s heart. It is this form that
is Krsna’s plenary portion, and it is this form on which the yogi
concentrates.

One who Is engaged in Krsna consciousness Is already a perfect
yogi. In fact, there is no difference between a Krsna conscious
devotee always engaged in the transcendental loving service of
Krsna and a perfect yogiengaged in meditation on the Supersoul.
There is no difference between a yogi in samadhi (in a trance
meditating on the Visnu form) and a Krsna conscious person
engaged in different activities. The devotee—even though engaged in various activities while in material existence—remains
always situated in Krsna. This is confirmed in the Bhakti-rasamrtaSindhu of Srila Rapa Gosvami: nikhilasv apy avasthasu jivan-muktah
sa ucyate. A devotee of the Lord, always acting in Krsna consciousness, iS automatically liberated. This is also confirmed in the
Fourteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita (14.26):

mam ca yo ‘vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate

sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhuyaya kalpate

‘*One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall
down in any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the level of Brahman.”’

Thus the devotee engaged in unalloyed devotional service has
already transcended the material modes of nature. Being situated
on the Brahman platform means being liberated. There are three
platforms: the bodily, or sensual; the mental; and the spiritual.
88 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

The spiritual platform is called the Brahman platform, and liberation means being situated on that platform. Being conditioned
souls, we are presently situated on the bodily, or sensual, platform. Those who are a little advanced—speculators, philosophers—are situated on the mental platform. Above this is the
platform of liberation, of Brahman realization.

That the devotee, always acting in Krsna consciousness, 1s
automatically situated on the liberated platform of Brahman is also
confirmed in the Narada-pancaratra:

dik-kalady-anavacchinne
krsne ceto vidhaya ca

tan-mayo bhavati ksipram
jivo brahmani yojayet

‘“‘By concentrating one’s attention on the transcendental form of
Krsna, who is all-pervading and beyond time and space, one becomes absorbed in thinking of Krsna and then attains the happy
State of transcendental association with Him.”’

Krsna consciousness is the highest stage of trance in yoga practice. This very understanding that Krsna is present as Paramatma
in everyone’s heart makes the yogi faultless. The Vedas confirm
this inconceivable potency of the Lord as follows:

eko ‘pi san bahudha yo ’vabhati
aisvaryad rupam ekam ca suryavad bahudheyate

‘*Visnu Is one, and yet He is certainly all-pervading. By His inconceivable potency, in spite of His one form, He is present everywhere. As the sun, He appears in many places at once.”’

atmaupamyena sarvatra
samam pasyati yo ‘rjuna

sukham va yadi va duhkham
sa yogi paramo matah

**He is a perfect yogi who, by comparison to his own self, sees the
true equality of all beings, both in their happiness and distress, O

 

Perception of the Supersoul 89

Arjuna!’ (Bg. 6.32) This is true universal vision. It is not that
God is sitting in my heart and not in the heart of a dog, cat, or cow.
Sarva-bhitanam means that He is sitting in the hearts of all living
entities, in the human heart and in the ant’s heart. The only difference is that cats and dogs cannot realize this. A human being, if
he tries to follow the sankhya-yoga or bhakti-yoga system, is able
to understand, and this is the prerogative of human life. If we miss
this opportunity, we suffer a great loss, for we have undergone the
evolutionary process and have passed through more than eight
million species of life in order to get this human form. We should
therefore be conscious of this and careful not to miss this opportunity. We have a good body, the human form, and intelligence
and civilization. We should not live like animals and struggle hard
for existence but should utilize our time thinking peacefully and
understanding our relationship with the Supreme Lord. This is the
instruction of Bhagavad-gita: Don’t lose this opportunity; utilize it
properly.
 

CHAPTER SEVEN

Yoga for the Modern Age

arjuna uvaca
yo ‘yam yogas tvaya proktah
samyena madhusudana
etasyaham na pasyami
cancalatvat sthitim sthiram

‘‘Arjuna said: O Madhusidana, the system of yoga which You
have summarized appears impractical and unendurable to me, for
the mind is restless and unsteady.”’ (Bg. 6.33)

This is the crucial test of the eightfold astanga-yoga system expounded herein by Lord Sri Krsna. It has already been explained
that one must sit in a certain way and concentrate the mind on the
form of Visnu seated within the heart. According to the astangayoga system, first of all one has to control the senses, follow all the
rules and regulations, practice the sitting posture and the
breathing process, concentrate the mind on the form of Visnu
within the heart, and then become absorbed in that form. There
are eight processes in this astanga-yoga system, but herein Arjuna
Says quite frankly that this astanga-yoga system is very difficult.
Indeed, he says that it “‘appears impractical and unendurable to
me.”’

Actually, the astanga-yoga system is not impractical, for were it
impractical, Lord Krsna would not have taken so much trouble to
describe it. It is not impractical, but it appears impractical. What

91
92 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

may be impractical for one man may be practical for another. Arjuna is representative of the common man in the sense that he is
not a mendicant or a sannyasi or a scholar. He is on the battlefield
fighting for his kingdom, and in this sense he is an ordinary man
engaged in a worldly activity. He is concerned with earning a
livelihood, supporting his family, and so on. Arjuna has many
problems, just as the common man, and generally this system of
astanga-yoga is impractical for the ordinary common man. That is
the point being made. It is practical for one who has already completely renounced everything and can sit in a secluded, sacred
place on the side of a hill or in acave. But who can do this in this
age? Although Arjuna was a great warrior, a member of the royal
family, and a very advanced person, he proclaims this yoga system
impractical. And what are we in comparison to Arjuna? If we attempt this system, failure is certain.

Therefore this system of mysticism described by Lord Krsna to
Arjuna beginning with the words sucau dese and ending with yogi
paramahis here rejected by Arjuna out of a feeling of inability. As
Stated before, it is not possible for an ordinary man to leave home
and go to a secluded place in the mountains or jungles to practice
yoga in this age of Kali. The present age is characterized by a bitter
Struggle for a life of short duration. As Kali-yuga progresses, our
life span gets shorter and shorter. Our forefathers lived for a
hundred years or more, but now people are dying at the age of
sixty or seventy. Gradually the life span will decrease even
further. Memory, mercy, and other good qualities will also decrease
in this age.

In Kali-yuga, people are not serious about self-realization even
by simple, practical means, and what to speak of this difficult yoga
system, which regulates the mode of living, the manner of sitting,
selection of place, and detachment of the mind from material
engagements. As a practical man, Arjuna thought it was impossible to follow this system of yoga, even though he was favorably
endowed in many ways. He was not prepared to become a pseudo
yogi and practice some gymnastic feats. He was not a pretender but
a soldier and a family man. Therefore he frankly admitted that for
him this system of yoga would be a waste of time. Arjuna belonged

 

ep coReece: ARERR Teas,

 

Yoga for the Modern Age 93

to the royal family and was highly elevated in terms of numerous
qualities; he was a great warrior, he had great longevity, and,
above all, he was the most intimate friend of Lord Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Five thousand years ago, when
Arjuna was living, the life span was very long. At that time, people
used to live up to one thousand years. In the present age of Kaliyuga, the life span is limited to a hundred years; in Dvapara-yuga,
the life span was a thousand years; in Treta-yuga, the life span was
ten thousand years; and in Satya-yuga, the life span was one
hundred thousand years. Thus as the yugas degenerate, the life
span decreases. Even though Arjuna was living at a time when one
would live and practice meditation for a thousand years, he still
considered this system impossible.

Five thousand years ago, Arjuna had much better facilities
than we do now, yet he refused to accept this system of yoga. In
fact, we do not find any record in history of his practicing it at any
time. Therefore, this system must be considered generally impossible in this age of Kali. Of course, it may be possible for some
very few, rare men, but for the people in general it is an impossible proposal. If this were so five thousand years ago, what of the
present day? Those who are imitating this yoga system in different
so-called schools and societies, although complacent, are certainly
wasting their time. They are completely ignorant of the desired
goal.

Since this astanga-yoga system is considered impossible, the
bhakti-yoga system is recommended for everyone. Without training or education, one can automatically participate in bhakti-yoga.
Even a small child can clap at kirtana. Therefore Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu has proclaimed bhakti-yoga the only system practical
for this age.

harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam

kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha

‘‘In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of
deliverance is chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no
 

94 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

other way. There is no other way. There is no other way.’” Chanting Is very simple, and one will feel the results immediately. Pratyaksavagamam dharmyam. If we attempt to practice other yoga
systems, we will remain in darkness; we will not know whether or
not we are making progress. In bhakti-yoga, one can understand

Yes, now Iam making progress.” This is the only yoga system by
which one can quickly attain self-realization and liberation in this
life. One doesn’t have to wait for another lifetime.

caficalam hi manah krsna
pramathi balavad drdham

tasyaham nigraham manye
vayor iva suduskaram

‘*For the mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate, and very strong, O
Krsna, and to subdue it is, it seems to me, more difficult than controlling the wind.” (Bg. 6.34) By chanting Hare Krsna, one captures the mind immediately. Just by saying the name Arsna and
hearing it, the mind is automatically fixed on Krsna. This means
that the yoga system is immediately attained. The entire yoga
system aims at concentration on the form of Visnu, and Krsna is
the original personality from whom all these Visnu forms are expanded. Krsna Is like the original candle from which all other can‘dies are lit. If one candle is lit, one can light any number of
candles, and there is no doubt that each candle is as powerful as
the original candle. Nonetheless, one has to recognize the original
candle as the original. Similarly, from Krsna millions of Visnu
forms expand, and each Visnu form is as good as Krsna, but Krsna
remains the original. Thus one who concentrates his mind on
Lord Sri Krsna, the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, immediately attains the perfection of yoga.

Sri-bhagavan uvaca
asamsayam maha-baho
mano durnigraham calam
abhyasena tu kaunteya
vairagyena ca grhyate

Yoga for the Modern Age 95

‘‘The Blessed Lord said: O mighty-armed son of Kuntt, it is undoubtedly very difficult to curb the restless mind, but it is possible
by constant practice and by detachment.” (Bg. 6.35) Krsna does
not say that it is not difficult. Rather, He admits that it is difficult,
but possible by means of constant practice. Constant practice
means engaging ourselves in some activities that remind us of
Krsna. In this Society for Krsna consciousness we therefore have
many activities—kirtana, temple activities, prasada, publications,
and so on. Everyone is engaged in some activity with Krsna at the
center. Therefore whether one is typing for Krsna, cooking for
Krsna, chanting for Krsna, or distributing literature for Krsna, he
is in the yoga system, and he is also in Krsna. We engage in activities just as in material life, but these activities are molded in
such a way that they are directly connected with Krsna. Thus
through every activity, Krsna consciousness 1s possible, and perfection in yoga follows automatically.

asamyatatmana yogo
dusprapa iti me matih

vasyatmana tu yatata
Sakyo ’vaptum upayatah

‘‘For one whose mind is unbridled, self-realization is difficult
work. But he whose mind is controlled and who strives by right
means is assured of success. That is My opinion.”’ (Bg. 6.36) The
Supreme Personality of Godhead declares that one who does not
accept the proper treatment to detach the mind from material
engagement can hardly achieve success in self-realization. Trying
to practice yoga while engaging the mind in material enjoyment is
like trying to ignite a fire while pouring water on it. Similarly, yoga
practice without mental control is a waste of time. I may sit down
to meditate and focus my mind on Krsna, and that is very
commendable, but there are many yoga societies that teach their
Students to concentrate on the void or on some color. That is, they
do not recommend concentration on the form of Visnu. Trying to
concentrate the mind on the impersonal or the void is very difficult and troublesome. It is stated by Sri Krsna in the Twelfth
Chapter of Bhagavad-gitd (12.5),
96 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

kleso ‘dhikataras tesam
avyaktasakta-cetasam

avyakta hi gatir duhkham
dehavadbhir avapyate

‘‘For those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested,
impersonal feature of the Supreme, advancement is very
troublesome. To make progress in that discipline is always difficult
for those who are embodied.”

In the temple, the devotee tries to concentrate on the form of
Krsna. Concentrating on nothingness, on void, is very difficult,
and naturally the mind is very flickering. Therefore instead of concentrating on the void, the mind searches out something else. The
mind must be engaged in thinking of something, and if it is not
thinking of Krsna, it must be thinking of maya. Therefore,
pseudomeditation on the impersonal void is simply a waste of
time. Such a show of yoga practice may be materially lucrative, but
useless as far as spiritual realization is concerned. I may open a
class in yogic meditation and charge people money for sitting
down and pressing their nose this way and that, but if my students
do not attain the real goal of yoga practice, they have wasted their
time and money, and I have cheated them.

_ Therefore one has to concentrate his mind steadily and conStantly on the form of Visnu, and that is called samadhi. In Krsna
consciousness, the mind is controlled by engaging it constantly in
the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Unless one is
engaged in Krsna consciousness, he cannot steadily control the
mind. A Krsna conscious person easily achieves the result of yoga
practice without separate endeavor, but a yoga practitioner cannot
achieve success without becoming Krsna conscious.

 

CHAPTER EIGHT

Failure and Success in Yoga

Suppose I give up my business, my ordinary occupation, and
begin to practice yoga, real yoga, as explained herein by Lord Sri
Krsna. Suppose I practice, and somehow or other I fail; I cannot
properly complete the process. What, then, 1s the result? This is
Arjuna’s very next question.

arjuna uvaca
ayatih sraddhayopeto
yogac calita-manasah
aprapya yoga-samsiddhim
kam gatim krsna gacchati

‘* Arjuna said: What is the destination of the man of faith who does
not persevere, who in the beginning takes to the process of selfrealization but who later desists due to worldly-mindedness and
thus does not attain perfection in mysticism?” (Bg. 6.37)

The path of self-realization, of mysticism, is described in the
Bhagavad-gita. The basic principle of self-realization is knowing
that ‘‘Iam not this material body but am different from it, and my
happiness is in eternal life, bliss, and knowledge.”’ Before arriving
at the point of self-realization, one must take it for granted that he
is not this body. That lesson is taught in the very beginning of
Bhagavad-gita: the living entity is not this material body but something different, and his happiness is in eternal life.

Clearly, this life is not eternal. The perfection of yoga means
attaining a blissful, eternal life full of knowledge. All yoga systems

97
98 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

should be executed with that goal in mind. It is not that one attends yoga classes to reduce fat or to keep the body fit for sense
gratification. This is not the goal of yoga, but people are taught this
way because they want to be cheated. Actually, if you undergo any
exercise program, your body will be kept fit. There are many
systems of bodily exercise—weight lifting and other sports—and
they help keep the body fit, reduce fat, and help the digestive
system. Therefore there is no need to practice yoga for these purposes. The real purpose for practicing yoga is to realize that I am
not this body. I want eternal happiness, complete knowledge, and
-eternal life—that is the ultimate end of the true yoga system.

The goal of yoga is transcendental, beyond both body and

mind. Self-realization is sought by three methods: (1) the path of

knowledge (jfidna); (2) the path of the eightfold system; or (3) ©

the path of bhakti-yoga. In each of these processes, one has to realize the constitutional position of the living entity, his relationship
with God, and the activities whereby he can reestablish the lost
link and achieve the highest perfectional stage of Krsna consciousness. Following any of the above-mentioned three methods, one
is sure to reach the supreme goal sooner or later. This was asserted
by the Lord in the Second Chapter: even a little endeavor on the
transcendental path offers a great hope for deliverance.

_ Of these three methods, the path of bhakti-yoga is especially
suitable for this age, because it is the most direct method of God
realization. To be doubly assured, Arjuna is asking Lord Krsna to
confirm His former statement. One may sincerely accept the path
of self-realization, but the process of cultivation of knowledge
(jfidna) and the practice of the eightfold yoga system are generally
very difficult for this age. Therefore, despite constant endeavor,
One may fail for many reasons. First of all, one may not be actually
following the process, the rules and regulations. To pursue the
transcendental path is more or less to declare war on the illusory
energy. When we accept any process of self-realization, we are actually declaring war against maya, illusion, and maya Is certain to
place many difficulties before us. Therefore, there is a chance of
failure, but one has to become very steady. Whenever a person
tries to escape the clutches of the illusory energy, she tries to

Failure and Success in Yoga 99

defeat the practitioner by various allurements. A conditioned soul
is already allured by the modes of material energy, and there is
every chance of being allured again, even while performing transcendental disciplines. This is called yogac calita-manasah: deviation from the transcendental path. Arjuna is inquisitive to know
the results of deviation from the path of self-realization.

As stated in Bhagavad-gita (6.37), quoted above, yogat means
‘*from the practice of yoga,’ calita means ‘‘diversion,”’ and mdnasah means ‘‘mind.’’ So there is every chance for the mind to
be diverted from yoga practice. We all have some experience of
trying to concentrate by reading a book, and our mind Is so disturbed that it does not allow us to concentrate on the book.

Actually, Arjuna is asking a very important question, for one is
subject to failure in all types of yoga—be it the eightfold yoga
system, the j”dana-yoga system of speculative philosophy, or the
bhakti-yoga system of devotional service. Failure is possible on
any of these paths, and the results of failure are clearly explained
by Sri Krsna Himself in the following dialogue with Arjuna
(Bg. 6.38-44). Arjuna, continuing his inquiry, asks,

kaccin nobhaya-vibhrastas
chinnabhram iva nasyati

apratistho maha-baho
vimudho brahmanah pathi

‘‘O mighty-armed Krsna, does not such a man, being deviated
from the path of Transcendence, perish like a riven cloud, with no
position in any sphere?”’

etan me samsayam krsna
chettum arhasy asesatah

tvad-anyah samSayasyasya
chetta na hy upapadyate

“This is my doubt, O Krsna, and I ask You to dispel it completely.
But for Yourself, no one is to be found who can destroy this
doubt.”’
 

100 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Sri-bhagavan uvaca
partha naiveha namutra

vinasas tasya vidyate
na hi kalyana-krt kascid

durgatim tata gacchati

“The Blessed Lord said: Son of Prtha, a transcendentalist engaged
in auspicious activities does not meet with destruction either in
this world or in the spiritual world; one who does good, My friend,
is never overcome by evil.”

prapya punya-krtam lokan
usitva sasvatih samah

Sucinam Srimatam gehe
yoga-bhrasto ‘bhijayate

**The unsuccessful yogi, after many, many years of enjoyment on
the planets of the pious living entities, is born into a family of
righteous people, or into a family of rich aristocracy.”’

atha va yoginam eva
kule bhavati dhimatam

etad dhi durlabhataram
loke janma yad idrsam

‘Or he takes his birth in a family of transcendentalists who are
surely great in wisdom. Verily, such a birth is rare in this world.”

tatra tam buddhi-samyogam
labhate paurva-dehikam

yatate ca tato bhuyah
samsiddhau kuru-nandana

**On taking such a birth, he again revives the divine consciousness
of his previous life, and he tries to make further progress in order
to achieve complete success, O son of Kuru.”

Failure and Success in Yoga 101

purvabhyasena tenaiva
hriyate hy avaso ‘pi sah

sabda-brahmativartate

‘*By virtue of the divine consciousness of his previous life, he
automatically becomes attracted to the yogic principles—even
without seeking them. Such an inquisitive transcendentalist, striving for yoga, stands always above the ritualistic principles of the
scriptures.”

Purification of consciousness is the purpose of this Krsna consciousness movement. Presently we are preparing this divine consciousness, for our consciousness goes with us at the time of
death. Consciousness is carried from the body just as the aroma of
a flower is carried by the air. When we die, this material body composed of five elements—earth, water, air, fire, and ether—decomposes, and the gross materials return to the elements. Or, as the
Christian Bible says, ‘‘Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt
return.’ In some societies the body is burned, in others it is
buried, and in others it is thrown to animals. In India, the Hindus
burn the body, and thus the body is transformed into ashes. Ash is
simply another form of earth. Christians bury the body, and after
some time in the grave, the body eventually turns to dust, which
again, like ash, is another form of earth. There are other
societies—like the Parsee community in India—that neither burn
nor bury the body but throw it to the vultures, and the vultures
immediately come to eat the body, and then the body ts eventually
transformed into stool. So in any case, this beautiful body, which
we are soaping and caring for so nicely, will eventually turn into
either stool, ashes, or dust. ©

At death, the finer elements (mind, intelligence, and ego),
which, combined, are called consciousness, carry the small particle of spirit soul to another body to suffer or enjoy, according to
one’s work. Our consciousness is molded by our work. If we
associate with stool, our consciousness, which ts like the air, will
carry the aroma of stool, and thus at the time of death will
102 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

transport us to an undesirable body. Or, if the consciousness
passes over roses, it carries the aroma of roses, and thus we are
transported to a body wherein we can enjoy the results of our previous work. If we train ourselves to work in Krsna consciousness,
our consciousness will carry us to Krsna. Different types of body
are developed according to consciousness; therefore, if we train
our consciousness according to the yogic principles, we will attain
a body wherein we can practice yoga. We will get good parents and
a chance to practice the yoga system, and automatically we will be
able to revive the Krsna consciousness practiced in our previous
body. Therefore it is stated in this last verse, ‘‘By virture of the
divine consciousness of his previous life, he automatically becomes attracted to the yogic principles—even without seeking
them.”’ Therefore, our present duty is to cultivate divine consciousness. If we want divine life, spiritual elevation, and eternal,
blissful life, full of knowledge—in other words, if we want to go
back home, back to Godhead—we have to train ourselves in
divine consciousness, or Krsna consciousness.

This can be easily done through association (sangdat safijdyate
kamah). Through divine association, our consciousness is made
divine, and through demoniac association, our consciousness is
made demoniac. Therefore, our consciousness must be trained to
be divine through the proper association of those in Krsna consciousness. That is the duty of one in this human form, a form that
gives us a chance to make our next life completely divine. To attain this end, we should try to contact those who are developing
divine consciousness.

prayatnad yatamanas tu
yogi samsuddha-kilbisah

aneka-janma-samsiddhas
tato yati param gatim

‘‘But when the yogi engages himself with sincere endeavor in
making further progress, being washed of all contaminations, then
ultimately, after many, many births of practice, he attains the
Supreme goal.’’ (Bg.6.45) As indicated in this verse, making

 

Failure and Success in Yoga 103

progress is a question of practice. When a child is born, he neither
knows how to smoke nor how to drink, but through association he
becomes a drunkard or a smoker. Association is the most important factor. Sangat safijayate kamah. For instance, there are many
business associations, and by becoming a member of certain
associations, one’s business flourishes. In any endeavor, association is very important. For the development of divine consciousness, we have established the International Society for Krishna
Consciousness, in which the methods of attaining divine consciousness are taught. In this society we invite everyone to come
and chant Hare Krsna. This process is not difficult, and even
children can participate. No previous qualifications are necessary;
one doesn’t need a master’s degree or doctorate. Our invitation to
everyone is to join this association and become Krsna conscious.

The Supreme Lord, God, is pure, and His kingdom is also
pure. If one wants to enter His kingdom, he must also be pure.
This is very natural; if we want to enter a particular society, we
must meet certain qualifications. If we want to return home, back
to Godhead, there is a qualification we must meet—we must not
be materially contaminated. And what is this contamination?
Unrestricted sense gratification. If we can free ourselves from the
material contamination of sense gratification, we can become eligible to enter the kingdom of God. That process of freeing ourselves, of washing ourselves of this contamination, is called the
yoga system. As stated before, yoga does not mean sitting down
for fifteen minutes, meditating, and then continuing with sense
gratification. To be cured of a certain disease, we must follow the
prescriptions of a physician. In this Sixth Chapter of Bhagavadgitd, the process of yoga is recommended, and we have to follow
the prescribed methods in order to be freed from material contamination. If we succeed in doing so, we can link up, or connect,
with the Supreme.

Krsna consciousness is a method for connecting directly with
the Supreme. This is the special gift of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Not only is this method direct and immediate, but it is
also practical. Although many people entering this Society have
no qualifications, they have become highly advanced in Krsna
104 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

consciousness simply by coming in contact with the Society. In
this age, life is very short, and a yoga process that takes a long time
will not help the general populace. In Kali-yuga, people are all so
unfortunate, and association is very bad. Therefore, this process
of directly contacting the Supreme is recommended—hari-nama.
Krsna is present in the form of His transcendental name, and we
can contact Him immediately by hearing His name. Simply by
hearing the name Arsna we immediately become freed from material contamination.
As stated in the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita (7.28),

yesam tv anta-gatam papam
jananam punya-karmanam

te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
bhajante mam drdha-vratah

**Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life,
whose sinful actions ‘are completely eradicated, and who are freed
from the duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service
with determination.”’ It is herein stressed that one must be completely fixed in Krsna consciousness, devoid of duality, and must
execute only pious activities. Because the mind is flickering,
dualities will always come. One is always wondering, ‘‘Shall I become Krsna conscious, or should I engage in another consciousness?’ These problems are always there, but if one is advanced by
virtue of pious activities executed in a previous life, his consciousness will be steadily fixed, and he will resolve, ‘‘I will be Krsna
conscious.”’ ,

Whether we acted piously in this life or a previous life really
doesn’t matter. This chanting of Hare Krsna is so potent that
through it we will immediately be purified. We should have the
determination, however, not to become implicated in further impious activities. Therefore, for those who want to be initiated in
this Society for Krsna consciousness, there are four principles: no
illicit sex, no intoxication, no meat-eating, and no gambling. We
don’t say, ‘‘No sex.’” But we do say, ‘‘No illicit sex.”’ If you want
Sex, get married and have Krsna conscious children. ‘‘No intoxi
 

ite AR MMs

 

Failure and Success in Yoga | 105

cation’’ means not even taking tea or coffee—to say nothing of
other intoxicants. And there is no gambling and no meat-eating
(including fish and eggs). Simply by following these four basic
rules and regulations, one becomes immediately uncontaminated.
No further endeavor is necessary. As soon as one joins this Krsna
consciousness movement and follows these rules and regulations,
material contamination is immediately removed, but one must be
careful not to be contaminated again. Therefore these rules and
regulations should be followed carefully.

Material contamination begins with these four bad habits, and
if we manage to check them, there is no question of contamination. Therefore, as soon as we take to Krsna consciousness, we
become free. However, we should not think that because Krsna
consciousness makes us free, we can again indulge in these four
bad habits and get free by chanting. That is cheating, and that will
not be allowed. Once we are freed, we should not allow ourselves
to become contaminated again. One should not think, °‘I shall
drink or have illicit sex and then chant and make myself free.”
According to some religious processes, it is said that one can commit all kinds of sin and then go to church, confess to a priest, and
be freed of all sin. Therefore people are sinning and confessing
and sinning and confessing over and over again. But this is not the
process of Krsna consciousness. If you are freed, that’s all right,
but don’t do it again. After all, what is the purpose of confession?
If you confess, ‘‘I have committed these sinful activities,’’ why
should you commit them again? If a thief confesses that he has
been pickpocketing, he is freed of his sin by virtue of his confession, but does this mean that he should go out again and pick
pockets? This requires a little intelligence. One should not think
that because by confessing one becomes freed, he should continue
to commit sinful activities, confess again, and again become freed.
That is not the purpose of confession.

We should therefore understand that if we indulge in
unrestricted sinful activities, we become contaminated. We
should be careful to have sex only according to the rules and
regulations, to eat only food that has been prescribed and properly
offered, to defend as Krsna advised Arjuna—for the right cause.
 

 

106 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

In this way we can avoid contamination and purify our life. If we

can continue to live a pure life until the time of death, we will

surely be transferred to the kingdom of God. When one is fully in

Krsna consciousness, he does not return to this material world

py ») gives up his body. This is stated in the Fourth Chapter
Bg. 4.9):

janma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatah

tyaktva deham punar janma
naiti mam eti so ‘rjuna

**One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and
activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in
this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.”’

The unsuccessful yogi returns to a good family or to a righteous, rich, or aristocratic family, but if one is situated in perfect
Krsna consciousness, he does not return again. He attains Goloka
Vrndavana in the eternal spiritual sky. We should be determined
not to come back to this material world again, because even if we
attain a good birth in a rich or aristocratic family, we can degrade
ourselves again by improperly utilizing our good chance. Why
take this risk? It is better to complete the process of Krsna consciousness in this life. It is very simple and not at all difficult. We
only have to keep thinking of Krsna; then we will be assured that
our next birth will be in the spiritual sky, in Goloka Vrndavana, in
the kingdom of God.

tapasvibhyo ‘dhiko yogi
jnanibhyo ‘pi mato ‘dhikah

karmibhyas cadhiko yogi
tasmad yogi bhavarjuna

““A yogi iS greater than the ascetic, greater than the empiricist,
and greater than the fruitive worker. Therefore, O Arjuna, in all
circumstances, be a yogi.’ (Bg. 6.46) There are different gradations of life within this material world, but if one lives according to

Failure and Success in Yoga 107

the yogic principle, especially the principles of bhakti-yoga, one is
living the most perfect life possible. Therefore Krsna is telling Arjuna, “‘My dear friend Arjuna, in all circumstances be a yogi and
remain a yogi.”

yoginam api sarvesam
mad-gatenantaratmana

Sraddhavan bhajate yo mam
sa me yuktatamo matah

‘**And of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith,
worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all.”
(Bg. 6.47) Here it is clearly stated that there are many types of
yogis—astanga-yogis, hatha-yogis, jnana-yogis, karma-yogis, and
bhakti-yogis—and that of all the yogis, ‘““he who always abides in
Me’”’ is said to be the greatest of all. “‘In Me’’ means in Krsna; that
is, the greatest yogi is always in Krsna consciousness. Such a yogi
‘‘abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in transcendental
loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga, and is
the highest of all.’’ This is the prime instruction of this Sixth
Chapter on sankhya-yoga: if one wants to attain the highest platform of yoga, one must remain in Krsna consciousness.

In Sanskrit, the word bhajate, with its root bhaj (bhaj-dhdatu)
means ‘“‘to render service.’’ But who renders service to Krsna unless he is a devotee of Krsna? In this Society of Krsna consciousness, devotees are rendering service without payment, out of love
for Krsna. They can render service elsewhere and get paid
hundreds of dollars a month, but this service rendered here is loving service (bhaj), based on love of Godhead. Devotees render
service In many ways—gardening, typing, cooking, cleaning, etc.
All activities are connected with Krsna, and therefore Krsna consciousness is prevailing twenty-four hours a day. That is the highest type of yoga. That is ‘‘worshiping Me in transcendental loving
service.’ As stated before, the perfection of yoga is keeping one’s
consciousness in contact with Visnu, or Krsna, the Supreme Lord.
We are not simply boasting that even a child can be the highest
 

 

108 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

yogi simply by participating in Krsna consciousness; no, this is the
verdict of authorized scripture— Bhagavad-gita. These words are
not our creation but are specifically stated by Lord Sri Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. |

~ Actually, worship and service are somewhat different. Worship
implies some motive. I worship a friend or an important man because if I can please that person, I may derive some profit. Those
who worship the demigods worship for some ulterior purpose,

and that is condemned in the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita ©

(7.20):

kamais tais tair hrta-jfianah
prapadyante ‘nya-devatah

fam tam niyamam asthaya
prakrtya niyatah svaya

*“Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender
unto demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of
worship according to their own natures.’’ Those who are
bewildered by lust worship the demigods with a motive; therefore,
when we speak of worship, some motive is implied. Service,
however, is different, for in service there is no motive. Service is
rendered out of love, just as a mother renders service to her child
out of love only. Everyone can neglect that child, but the mother
cannot, because love is present. Bhaj-dhatu is similar in that there
is no question of motive, but service is rendered out of pure love.
That is the perfection of Krsna consciousness.

This is also the recommendation of Srimad-Bhdgavatam
(1.2.6):

Sa vai pumsam paro dharmo
yato bhaktir adhoksaje

ahaituky apratihata
yayatma suprasidati

‘‘The supreme occupation [dharma] for all humanity is that by
which men can attain to loving devotional service unto the tran
Failure and Success in Yoga 109

scendent Lord. Such devotional service must be unmotivated and
uninterrupted to completely satisfy the self.°’ Yato bhaktir adhoksaje. The word bhakti comes from the same root as bhaj. The test
of a first-class religion is whether or not we are developing our
love for God. If we practice religion with some ulterior motive,
hoping to fulfill our material necessities, our religion is not first
class but third class. It must be understood that first-class religion
is that by which we can develop our love of Godhead. Ahaituky
apratihata. This perfect religion should be executed without
ulterior motive or impediment. That is the yoga system recommended in Srimad-Bhagavatam and in this Sixth Chapter of
Bhagavad-gita. That is the system of Krsna consciousness.

Krsna consciousness is not rendered with some motive in
mind. The devotees are not serving Krsna in order that He supply
them this or that. For a devotee there is no scarcity. One should
not think that by becoming Krsna conscious, one becomes poor.
No. If Krsna is there, everything is there, because Krsna is everything. But this does not mean that we should try to conduct business with Krsna, demanding, “Krsna give me this. Give me
that.’’ Krsna knows better than we do, and He knows our motives.
A child does not make demands of his parents, saying, ‘‘Dear
father, give me this. Give me that.’’ Since the father knows his
child’s necessities, there is no need for the child to ask. Similarly,
it is not a very good idea to ask God to give us this or that. Why
should we ask? If God is all-knowing and all-powerful, He knows
our wants, our necessities, and can supply them. This is confirmed
in the Vedas. Eko bahtinam yo vidadhati kaman: *‘The single one
almighty God is supplying all necessities to millions and trillions
of living entities.’ Therefore, we should not demand anything of
God, because our demands are already met. The supplies are
already there. We should simply try to love God. Even cats and
dogs are receiving their necessities without going to church and
petitioning God. If a cat or dog receives its necessities without
making demands, why should the devotee not receive what he
needs? Therefore we should not demand anything from God but
should simply try to love Him. Then everything will be fulfilled,
and we will have attained the highest platform of yoga.
 

 

110 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

We.can actually see how the various.parts of the body serve the
body. If I have an itch, the fingers immediately scratch. If I want to
see something, the eyes immediately look. If I want to go somewhere, the legs immediately take me. As I receive service from
the different parts of my body, God receives service from all parts
of His creation. God is not meant to serve. If the limbs of the body
serve the entire body, the parts of the body automatically receive
energy. Similarly, if we serve Krsna, we automatically receive all
necessities, all energy.

Srimad-Bhdgavatam confirms that we are all parts and parcels
of the Supreme. If a part of the body cannot regularly render service, it gives pain to the body, and if a person does not render service to the Supreme Lord, he is simply giving pain and trouble to
the Supreme Lord. Therefore such a person has to suffer, just as a
criminal has to suffer when he does not abide by the laws of the
state. Such a criminal may think, ‘‘I’m a very good man,”’ but because he is violating the laws of the state, he is giving the government trouble, and consequently the government puts him in
prison. When living entities give the Supreme Lord trouble, the
Lord comes, collects them together, and puts them in this material world. In essence, He says, ‘‘You live here. You are all disturbing the creation; therefore you are criminals and have to live
in this material world.’ Sthandd bhrastah patanty adhah: ‘‘One
falls down from his constitutional position.” Ifa finger is diseased,
it has to be amputated lest it pollute the entire body. Having
rebelled against the principles of God consciousness, we are cut
off from our original position. We have fallen. In order to regain
our original position, we must resume rendering service unto the
Supreme Lord. That is the perfect cure. Otherwise we will continue to suffer pain, and God will suffer pain because of us. If 1am
a father, and my son is not good, I suffer, and my son suffers also.
Similarly, we are all sons of God, and when we cause God
pain, we are also pained. The best course Is to revive our original
Krsna consciousness and engage in the Lord’s service. That is our
natural life, and that is possible in the spiritual sky, Goloka
Vrndavana.

The word avajananti actually means ‘‘to neglect.’’ This means

Failure and Success in Yoga 111

thinking, ‘“What is God? I am God. Why should I serve God?”’
This is just like a criminal thinking, ‘“What is this government? I
can manage my own affairs. I don’t care for the government.”
This is called avajananti. We may speak in this way, but the police
department is there to punish us. Similarly, material nature is here
to punish us with the threefold miseries. These miseries are meant
for those rascals who avajananti, who don’t care for God or who
take the meaning of God cheaply, saying, ‘I am God. You are
God.”

Thus the general progress of yoga is gradual. First one practices
karma-yoga, which refers to ordinary, fruitive activity. Ordinary
activities include sinful activities, but kKarma-yoga excludes such
activities. Karma-yoga refers only to good, pious activities, or
those actions which are prescribed. After performing karmayoga, one comes to the platform of jf#ana-yoga, knowledge. From
the platform of knowledge, one attains to this astanga-yoga,
the eightfold yoga system—dhyana, dharana, pranayama, asana,
etc.—and from astanga-yoga, as one concentrates on Visnu, one
comes to the point of bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga is the perfectional
stage, and if one practices Krsna consciousness, one attains this
stage from the very beginning. That is the direct route.

If one practices jfdna-yoga and thinks that he has attained the
ultimate, he is mistaken. He has to make further progress. If we
are on a Staircase and have to reach the top floor, which is the
hundredth floor, we are mistaken if we think we have arrived
when we are on the thirtieth floor. As stated before, the whole
yoga system may be likened to a staircase, connecting or linking us
to God. In order to attain the ultimate, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, we must go to the highest platform, and that is bhaktiyoga. :

But why walk up all these steps if we have a chance to take an
elevator? By means of an elevator, we can reach the top in a matter of seconds. Bhakti-yoga is this elevator, the direct process by
which we can reach the top in a matter of seconds. We can go step
by step, following all the other yogasystems, or we can go directly.
Since in this age of Kali-yuga people have short life spans and are
always disturbed and anxious, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, by His
112 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

causeless mercy, has given us the elevator by which we can come
immediately to the platform of bhakti-yoga. That direct means is
the chanting of Hare Krsna, and that is the special gift of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Therefore Ripa Gosvami offers respects
to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, namo maha-vadanyaya krsnaprema-pradaya te: ‘‘Oh, You are the most munificent incarnation
because You are directly giving love of Krsna. To attain pure love
of Krsna, one has to pass through so many stages of yoga, but
You are giving this love directly. Therefore You are the most
munificent.”’

As stated in the Eighteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita (18.55),

bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah

tato mam tattvato jnatva
visate tad-anantaram

““One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by
devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the
Supreme Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of
God.”’ In the other yoga systems, there must be a mixture of
bhakti, but bhakti-yoga is unadulterated devotion. It is service
without a motive. Generally people pray with some motive in
mind, but we should pray only for further engagement in devotional service. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu has taught us that when
we pray we should not pray for anything material. In the beginning, we cited Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s perfect prayer:

na dhanam na janam na sundarim
kavitam va jagad-isa kamaye

mama janmani janmanisvare
bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi

““O Almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor to
enjoy beautiful women. Nor do I want any number of followers.
What I want only is the causeless mercy of Your devotional service
in my life, birth after birth.’ (Siksdstaka 4) In this verse, Caitanya

Failure and Success in Yoga 113

Mahaprabhu addresses the Supreme Lord as Jagadisa. Jagat’
means ‘“‘universe,’’ and isa means ‘‘controller.’’ The Supreme
Lord is the controller of the universe, and this can be underStood by anyone; therefore Caitanya Mahaprabhu addresses the
Supreme Lord as Jagadisa instead of Krsna or Rama. In the material world we find many controllers, so it is logical that there is a
controller of the entire universe. Caitanya Mahaprabhu does not
pray for wealth, followers, or beautiful women, because these are
material requests. Usually, people want to be very great leaders
within this material werld. Someone tries to become a very rich
man like Ford or Rockefeller, or someone else tries to become
president or some great leader that many thousands of people will
follow. These are all material demands: ‘‘Give me money. Give
me followers. Give me a nice wife.’’ Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
refuses to make such materialistic requests. He frankly says, ‘‘I
don’t want any of these things.’’ He even says, mama janmani janmanisvare. That is, He’s not even asking for liberation. Just as the
materialists have their demands, the yogis demand liberation. But
Caitanya Mahaprabhu does not want anything of this nature. Then
why is He a devotee? Why is He worshiping Krsna? ‘“‘I simply
want to engage in Your service birth after birth.’’ He does not
even pray for an end to birth, old age, disease, and death. There
are no demands whatsoever, for this is the highest platform, the
stage of bhakti-yoga.

Chanting Hare Krsna is also asking the Lord, °“‘Please engage
me in Your service.’” This is the mantra taught by Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself. Hare refers to the energy of the Lord, and Arsna
and Rama are names for the Lord Himself. When we chant Hare
Krsna, we are asking Krsna to please engage us in His service.
This 1s because our entire material disease is due to our having
forgotten to serve God. In illusion, we are thinking, “‘I am God.
What is the other God that I have to serve? I myself am God.”’
Ultimately, that is the only disease, the last snare of illusion. First
of all, a person tries to be prime minister, president, Rockefeller,
Ford, this and that, and when one fails or attains such a post and is
still unhappy, he wants to become God. That is like becoming an
even higher president. When I understand that the presidency
114 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

does not afford me eternal bliss and knowledge, I demand the
highest presidency. I demand to become God. In any case, the demand is there, and this demand ts our disease. In illusion, we are
demanding to be the highest, but the process of bhakti-yoga is just
the opposite. We want to become servants, servants of the servants of the Lord. There is no question of demanding to become
the Lord; we just want to serve. That’s all.

Our original nature is rooted in service, and wanting to serve Is
the crucial test for the devotee. We may not realize it, but in this
material world we are also serving. If we want to become president, we have to make so many promises to the voters. In other
words, the president has to say, “‘I’Il give the people my service.”
Unless he promises to serve his country, there is no question of
his becoming president. So even if one is the most exalted leader,
his position is to render service. This is very difficult for people to
understand. Despite becoming the highest executive in the land,
one has to give service to the people. If that service is not given,
one is likely to be usurped, fired, or killed. In the material world,
service is very dangerous. If there is a little discrepancy in one’s
service, one is immediately fired. When the people did not like
the service that President Nixon was rendering, they forced him
to resign. Some people disagreed with President Kennedy, and he
was killed. Similarly, in India, Gandhi was also killed because
some people did not like the way he was rendering service. This is
always the position in the material world; therefore one should be
intelligent enough to decide to cease rendering service for material motives. We must render service to the Supreme Lord, and
that rendering of service is our perfection.

We have formed this International Society for Krishna Consciousness in order to teach people what they have forgotten. In
this material world, we have forgotten the service of RadhaKrsna; therefore we have become servants of maya, the senses.
Therefore, in this Society we are saying, ‘‘You are serving your
senses. Now just turn your service to Radha and Krsna, and you
will be happy. You have to render service—either to maya [illusion], the senses, or to Sri Sri Radha-Krsna.””

In this world, everyone is serving the senses, but people are

 

 

Failure and Success in Yoga | 115

not satisfied. No one can be satisfied, because the senses are always demanding more gratification, and this means that we are
constantly having to serve the senses. In any case, our position as
servant remains the same. It is a question of whether we want to
be happy in our service. It is the verdict of Bhagavad-gita and the
other Vedic scriptures that we will never be happy trying to serve
our senses, for they are only sources of misery. Therefore Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu prays to be situated in Krsna’s service. He
also prays, ,

ayi nanda-tanuja kinkaram
patitam mam visame bhavambudhau
krpaya tava pada-pankajasthita-dhili-sadrsam vicintaya

‘“O son of Maharaja Nanda [Krsna], I am Your eternal servitor,
yet somehow or other I have fallen into the ocean of birth and
death. Please pick me up from this ocean of death and place me as
one of the atoms at Your lotus feet.’ (Siksdstaka5) This is
another way of asking Krsna to engage us in His service.

Loving devotional service can only be rendered to the personal
form of Krsna, Syamasundara. The impersonalists emphasize the
visva-rupa, the universal form exhibited in the Eleventh Chapter
of Bhagavad-gitd, but it is stated therein (11.21) that the demigods
are very much afraid of this form, and Arjuna says,

adrsta-purvam hrsito ‘smi drstva
bhayena ca pravyathitam mano me

tad eva me darsaya deva riipam
prasida devesa jagan-nivasa

‘‘After seeing this universal form, which I have never seen
before, Iam gladdened, but at the same time my mind Is disturbed
with fear. Therefore please bestow Your grace upon me and reveal
again Your form as the Personality of Godhead [Krsna, or Syamasundara], O Lord of lords, O abode of the universe.”’ (Bg. 11.45)
There is no question of loving the visva-rupa. If Krsna comes
116 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

before you in the visva-rupa form, you will be so filled with fear
that you will forget your love. So don’t be eager like the impersonalists to see the visva-rupa form; just render loving service to
Syamasundara, Krsna.

We have more or less seen Krsna as the visva-rupa during wartime in Calcutta in 1942. There was a siren, and we ran into a
shelter, and the bombing began. In this way, we were seeing that
visva-rupa, and I was thinking, ‘‘Of course, this is also just another
form of Krsna. But this is not a very lovable form.’ A devotee
wants to love Krsna in His original form, and this visva-rupa is not
~ His original form. Being omnipotent, Krsna can appear in any

form, but His lovable form is that of Krsna, Syamasundara. Although a man may be a police officer, when he is at home he is a
beloved father to his son. But if he comes home firing his
revolver, the son will be so frightened that he will forget that he is
his beloved father. Naturally, the child loves his father when he’s
at home like a father, and similarly we love Krsna as He is in His
eternal abode, in the form of Syamasundara.

The visva-riipa was shown to Arjuna to warn those rascals who
claim, “SI am God.”’ Arjuna asked to see the visva-riipa so that in
the future we may have some criterion by which to test rascals
who claim to be God. In other words, if someone says, ‘‘I am
God,’’ we can simply reply, ‘‘If you are God, please show me your
visva-rupa.’’ And we can rest assured that such rascals cannot display this form. |

Of course, Arjuna was offering all respects to the visva-rtipa
form. That is a natural quality of a devotee. A devotee even
respects Durga, Maya, because Maya is Krsna’s energy. If we
respect Krsna, we respect everyone, even an ant. Therefore
Brahma prays,

srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka
chayeva yasya bhuvanani bibharti durga

icchanurtipam api yasya ca cestate sa
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami

**The external potency, Maya, who is of the nature of the shadow
of the cit [spiritual] potency, is worshiped by all people as Durga,

 

 

Failure and Success in Yoga 117

the creating, preserving, and destroying agency of this mundane
world. I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, in accordance with
whose will Durg4 conducts herself.’ (Brahma-samhita 5.44) Thus
when we pray to Krsna, we pray to Durga immediately, because
Durga is His energy. And when we pray to Durga, we are actually
praying to Krsna, because she is working under the direction of
Krsna. When the devotee sees the activities of Maya, he sees
Krsna immediately, thinking, ““Oh, Maya ts acting so nicely under
the direction of Krsna.’ When one offers respect to a policeman,
he is actually offering respect to the government. Durga, the material energy, is so powerful that she can create, annihilate, and
maintain, but in all cases she is acting under Krsna’s directions.

Through bhakti, pure devotion to Krsna, we can leave the
association of Maya and be promoted to the eternal association of
Krsna. Some of the gopas, Krsna’s friends, are eternal associates,
and others are promoted to that eternal position. If only the eternal associates of Krsna can play with Him and others cannot, then
what is the meaning of becoming Krsna conscious? We can also
become eternal associates of Krsna through pious deeds executed
in many, many lives. Actually, in the Vrndavana manifest in this
material world, the associates of Krsna are mainly conditioned living entities who have been promoted to the perfect stage of Krsna
consciousness. Thus promoted, they are first of all allowed to see
Krsna on the planet where Krsna’s pastimes are being enacted.
After this, they are promoted to the transcendental Goloka
Vrndavana in the spiritual sky. Therefore it is stated in the
Bhagavata (10.12.11), krta-punya-purijah.

Bhakti-yoga means connecting ourselves with Krsna, God, and
becoming His eternal associates. Bhakti-yoga cannot be applied to
any other objective; therefore in Buddhism, for instance, there is
no bhakti-yoga, because they do not recognize the Supreme Lord
existing as the supreme objective. Christians, however, practice
bhakti-yoga when they worship Jesus Christ, because they are accepting him as the son of God and are therefore accepting God.
Unless one accepts God, there is no question of bhakti-yoga.
Christianity, therefore, is also a form of Vaisnavism, because God
is recognized. Nonetheless, there are different stages of God
realization. Mainly, Christianity says, ‘‘God is great,’ and thatisa
 

118 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

very good assertion, but the actual greatness of God can be understood from Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam. Accepting the
greatness of God is the beginning of bhakti. Bhakti-yogaalso exists
among the Muhammadans, because God is the target in the
Muslim religion. However, where there is no recognition of a personal God—in other words, where there is only impersonalism—
there is no question of bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga must include
three items: the servitor, the served, and service. One must be
present to accept service, and one must be present to render service. The via media is the process of service itself, bhakti-yoga.
Now, if there is no one to accept that service, how is bhakti-yoga
possible? Therefore, if a philosophy or religion does not accept
God as the Supreme Person, there is no possibility of bhakti-yoga
being applied.

In the bhakti-yoga process, the role of the spiritual master is
most important and essential. Although the spiritual master will
always come back until his devotees have achieved God realization, one should not try to take advantage of this. We should not
trouble our spiritual master but should complete the bhakti-yoga
process in this life. The disciple should be serious in his service to
the spiritual master, and if the devotee is intelligent, he should
think, ‘‘Why should I act in such a way that my spiritual master
has to take the trouble to reclaim me again? Let me realize Krsna
in this life.”’ That ts the proper way of thinking. We should not
think, ‘‘Oh, Iam sure that my spiritual master will come and save
me. Therefore I will do as I please.”’ If we have any affection for
Our spiritual master, we should complete the process in this life,
so that he does not have to return to reclaim us.

In this regard, there is the example of Bilvamangala Thakura,
who, in his previous life, was elevated almost to prema-bhakti, the
highest platform of devotional service. However, since there is always a Chance for a falldown, somehow or other he fell down. In
his next life, he was born in a very rich bradhmana family, in accordance with the principle enunciated in the Sixth Chapter of
Bhagavad-gita (6.41): sucinam srimatam gehe. Unfortunately, as is
often the case with rich boys, he became a prostitute hunter. Yet it
is said that his spiritual master instructed him through his
prostitute, saying, ‘““Oh, you are so attached to this mere flesh and

 

Failure and Success in Yoga 119

bones. If you were this much attached to Krsna, how much good
you might achieve!’’ Immediately Bilvamangala Thakura resumed
his devotional service.

Although the spiritual master assumes responsibility for his
disciple, we should not take advantage of this. Rather, we should
try to please the spiritual master (yasya prasadad bhagavatprasadah). We should not put our spiritual master in such a position that he has to reclaim us from a house of prostitution. But
even if he has to do so, he will do it, because he assumes this responsibility when he accepts his disciple.

The bhakti-yoga process should be completed in this life, because in this life we have all the instruments necessary to become fully Krsna conscious. We have mrdangas and cymbals and
tongues with which to chant Hare Krsna. Even if we don’t have
mrdangas and cymbals, we have a tongue. No one has to purchase
a tongue. We also have ears with which to hear the sound that the
tongue vibrates. Therefore we have all the instruments we need
with us—a tongue and ears. We have only to chant Hare Krsna
and use our ears to hear this vibration, and all perfection will be
there. We don’t have to become highly educated scientists or philosophers. We have only to chant and hear.

Thus we have everything complete. Purnam adah purnam idam:
everything created by God is complete. This aggregate earth, for
instance, is complete. There is sufficient water in the oceans, and
the sun acts to evaporate this water, turn it into clouds, and drop .
rain on the land to produce plants. And from the mountains, pure
rivers are flowing to supply water throughout the year. If we want
to evaporate a few hundred gallons of water, we have to make
many arrangements, but the creation is so complete that millions
of tons of water are being drawn from the ocean, turned into
clouds, and then sprayed all over the land and reserved on the
peaks of mountains so that water will be present for the production of grains and vegetables. Thus the creation is complete
because it comes from the complete, and similarly our bodies are
also complete for spiritual realization. The complete machine ts
already with us. We have only to utilize it to vibrate the transcendental sound (sabda) of Hare Krsna, and we will attain complete
liberation from all material pangs.
 

 

CHAPTER NINE

Destination After Death

sarva-dvarani samyamya
mano hrdi nirudhya ca
murdhny adhayatmanah pranam
asthito yoga-dharanam

‘The yogic situation is that of detachment from all sensual
engagements. Closing all the doors of the senses and fixing the
mind on the heart and the life air at the top of the head, one
establishes himself in yoga.’ (Bg. 8.12)

One translation of the word yoga is ‘‘plus’’—that is, just the opposite of minus. At the present moment, due to our materially
contaminated consciousness, we are minus God. When we add
God to our lives, when we connect with Him, life is perfected.
This process has to be finished at the time of death; therefore as
long as we are alive, we have to practice approaching that point of
perfection so that at the time of death, when we give up this material body, we can realize the Supreme.

prayana-kale manasacalena
bhaktya yukto yoga-balena caiva
bhruvor madhye pranam avesya samyak
sa tam param purusam upaiti divyam

‘“One who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the
eyebrows and in full devotion engages himself in remembering

121
 

122 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

the Supreme Lord, will certainly attain to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.”” (Bg. 8.10) The words praydna-kale mean ‘‘at the
time of death.” Life is kind of a preparation for the final examination, which is death. If we pass that examination, we are transferred to the spiritual world. According to a very common Bengali
proverb, ‘‘Whatever you do for perfection will be tested at the
time of your death.”

This process by which the yogi closes the doors of the senses is
technically called pratyahara, meaning ‘‘just the opposite.’” Presently, our senses are engaged in seeing worldly beauty. ‘‘Just the
Opposite’’ means retracting the senses from that beauty and
Seeing the beauty inside. Hearing is concentrated on the omkara
sound that is within. Similarly, all the other senses are withdrawn
from external activity. The mind is then concentrated on the
visnu-murti within the heart (manah hrdi nirudhya). The word
nirudhya means “‘confining’’ the mind within the heart. When the
yogi has thus withdrawn his senses and concentrated his mind, he
transfers the life air to the top of the head and decides where he
should go. There are innumerable planets, and beyond these planets is the spiritual world. The yogis obtain information of these
planets from the Vedic literatures, just as, before coming to the
United States, | obtained information about this country from
books. Since all the higher planets in the spiritual world are described in the Vedic literatures, the yogi knows everything and can
transfer himself to any planet he likes. He does not need a material
Spaceship.

Scientists have been trying for many years to reach other planets with spaceships, but this is not the process. Maybe by this
means one or two men can reach a planet, but that is not the
general process. It is not possible for everyone. Generally, if one
wants to transfer himself to a higher planet, he practices this
jnana-yoga system. Not the bhakti-yoga system. The system of
bhakti-yoga is not used for attaining any material planet.

The devotees of Krsna are not interested in any planet within
this material universe, because they know that on all planets the
four basic miseries exist—birth, old age, disease, and death. In the
higher planets, one’s life span may be much greater than on this

 

Destination After Death 123

earth, but death is ultimately there. Therefore those who are in
Krsna consciousness are not interested in material life but spiritual life, which means relief from these fourfold miseries. Those
who are intelligent do not try to elevate themselves to any planet
within this material world. To attain a higher planet, one has to
prepare a particular type of body to enable one to live on that
planet..We cannot attain these planets by artificial, materialistic
means, because a suitable body is necessary to live there. We can
Stay within water only a short while, but fish are living there their
entire lives. But the fish does not have a body suitable for living on
the land. Similarly, to enter a higher planet, one has to prepare a
Suitable body.

In the higher planets, six of our months are equal to one of
their days, and the inhabitants of these planets live ten thousand
years. This is all described in the Vedic literatures. Although the
life span on these planets is very long, there is ultimately death.
After ten thousand years, twenty thousand years, or millions of
years—it doesn’t matter—death is ultimately there.

In the very beginning of Bhagavad-gita, however, we learn that
we are not subject to death.

na jayate mriyate va kadacin

nayam bhitva bhavita va na bhuyah
ajo nityah Sasvato ‘yam purano

na hanyate hanyamane sarire

‘**For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once
been, does he ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, everexisting, undying, and primeval. He is not slain when the body is
slain.” (Bg. 2.20) Krsna thus instructs us that we are spirit soul
and eternal; therefore why should we subject ourselves to birth
and death? One who utilizes his intelligence can understand this.
One who is situated in Krsna consciousness is not interested in
promotion to any planet where death exists; rather, being promoted to the spiritual sky, he receives a body just like God’s.
ISvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-dnanda-vigrahah. God’s body is
sac-cid-ananda—eternal, full of knowledge, and full of pleasure.
124 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Therefore Krsna is called the reservoir of all pleasure. If, upon
leaving this body, we transfer ourselves to the spiritual world—to
Krsna’s planet or any other spiritual planet—we attain a similar
body full of sac-cid-ananda.

The spirit soul is a very minute particle within the body. It cannot be seen like the external body, but it is sustaining the external
body. The object of the sat-cakra system is to locate the soul at the
topmost part of the head. From there, one who is perfect in
dhyana-yoga can transfer himself to a higher planet at will. That is
the perfection of this type of yoga. The dhydana-yogi is somewhat
like a traveler who thinks, “‘Oh, let me see what the moon Is like,
then I will transfer myself to higher planets.’’ He goes from here
to there in the universe, just as on earth travelers go from New
York to California or Canada. But a Krsna conscious person is not
interested in such interplanetary travel within the material universe. His goal is service to Krsna and transferral to the spiritual
Sky.

om ity ekaksaram brahma
vyaharan mam anusmaran
yah prayati tyajan deham
sa yati paramam gatim

‘* After being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred
syllable om, the supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and quits his body, he will
certainly reach the spiritual planets.”’ (Bg. 8.13) Om, or omkara, is
the concise form, or impersonal form, of the transcendental vibration. The dhyana-yogi should vibrate om while remembering
Krsna, or Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The impersonal sound of Krsna is om, but the sound Hare Krsna contains
om. Whatever the case, the entire yoga system aims at concentration on Visnu. Impersonalists may imagine a form of Visnu, but
the personalists do not imagine; they actually see the form of the
Supreme Lord. Whether one imagines or factually sees, one has to
concentrate his mind on the Visnu form. Here the word mam
means ‘“‘unto the Supreme Lord, Visnu.’’ If one can remember
Visnu upon quitting this body, he can enter into the spiritual
kingdom.

 

Fa
|
=
&
#
¥

Destination After Death 125

One who is intelligent naturally thinks, ‘‘I am permanent and
eternal. Why should I be interested in things that are not permanent?’ Actually, no one wants an existence that is temporary. If
we are living in an apartment and the landlord asks us to vacate,
we have to do so, whether we want to leave or not. However, if we
move to a better apartment, we are not sorry. It is our nature,
however, to want to remain wherever we live. That is because we
are permanent and want a permanent residence. Our inclination is
to remain. Therefore we don’t want to die. We don’t want the miseries of birth, old age, disease, and death. These are external
miseries inflicted by material nature, and they attack us like some
fever. In order to extricate ourselves, we have to take certain precautions. To get rid of these miseries, it is necessary to get rid of
the material body, because these miseries are inherent in material
existence.

Thus by vibrating om and leaving the material body thinking of
the Supreme Lord, the yogi is transferred to the spiritual world.
Those who are not personalists, however, cannot enter into the
spiritual planet of Lord Sri Krsna. They remain outside, in the
brahmajyoti effulgence. Just as the sunshine is not different from
the sun globe, the brahmajyoti effulgence of the Supreme Lord is
not different from the Supreme Lord. The impersonalists are
placed in that brahmajyoti as minute particles. We are all spiritual
sparks, and the brahmajyoti is full of these spiritual sparks. In this
way, the impersonalists merge into the spiritual existence;
however, individuality is retained, because the spirit soul is conStitutionally an individual. Because the impersonalists don’t want
a personal form, they are placed and held in the impersonal
brahmajyoti. There they exist just as atoms exist within the
sunshine. The individual spiritual spark remains within the
brahmajyoti as if homogeneous.

As living entities, we all want enjoyment. We do not simply
want existence. We are constitutionally sac-cid-ananda—eternal
(sat), full of knowledge (cit), and full of bliss (a@nanda). Those
who enter the impersonal brahmajyoti cannot remain there eternally with the knowledge that ‘‘Now I am merged. I am now one
with Brahman.”’ Although there is eternality and knowledge, bliss
(ananda) is lacking. Who can remain alone in a room year after
 

 

126 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

year reading some book and trying to enjoy himself? We cannot
remain alone forever. Eventually we will leave that room and look
for some association. It is our nature to want some recreation with
others. The impersonalists, dissatisfied with the loneliness of their
position in the impersonal effulgence of the Lord, therefore return
again to this material world. This is stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(10.2.32): )

ye ‘nye 'ravindaksa vimukta-maninas
tvayy asta-bhavad avisuddha-buddhayah

aruhya krcchrena param padam tatah
patanty adho ‘nadrta-yusmad-anghrayah

‘**O lotus-eyed Lord, although nondevotees who accept severe
austerities and penances to achieve the highest position may think
themselves liberated, their intelligence is impure. They fall down
from their position of imagined superiority because they have no
regard for Your lotus feet.”’

The impersonalists are like astronauts in search of a planet. If
they cannot rest in some planet, they have to return to earth. It is
herein stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (anddrta-yusmad-anghrayah)
that the impersonalist must return to the material world because
he has neglected to serve the Supreme Lord with love and devotion. As long as we are on this earth, we should practice to love
and serve Krsna, the Supreme Lord; then we can enter His spiritual planet. If we are not trained up in this way, we can enter the
brahmajyoti as an impersonalist, but there is every risk that we will
again fall down into material existence. Out of loneliness, we will
search out some association and therefore return to the material
world. What we actually want is the eternal association of the
Supreme Lord. This is our constitutional position of eternality,
knowledge, and pleasure. If we are alone, if we do not associate
with the Supreme Lord, that pleasure is lacking. For want of
pleasure, we feel uncomfortable. For want of pleasure, we will accept any kind of association, any kind of pleasure. Therefore, out
of a kind of desperation, we will say, ‘‘All right, then let me have
material pleasure again.”” That is the risk the impersonalists take.

Destination After Death 127

In the material world, the highest pleasure is found in sex.
That is but a perverted reflection of the pleasure experienced with
Krsna in the spiritual world. Unless there is sex present in the
Spiritual world, it cannot be reflected here. However, we should
understand that here the reflection is perverted. Actual life is
there in Krsna. Krsna is full of pleasure, and if we train ourselves
to serve Him in Krsna consciousness, it will be possible at the
time of death to transfer ourselves to the spiritual world and enter
into Krsnaloka, Krsna’s planet, and enjoy ourselves in the association of Krsna, the reservoir of all pleasure.

Krsna’s planet is described in Brahma-samhita (5.29) in this
way:

cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-yrksalaksavrtesu surabhir abhipalayantam

laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-sevyamanam
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami

‘*I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor, who
is tending the surabhi cows that fulfill all desires, who is surrounded by millions of purpose (wish-fulfilling) trees and abodes
built with spiritual gems, and who is always served with great
reverence and affection by hundreds and thousands of goddesses
of fortune.”’ In this way Krsnaloka is described. There the houses
are made of touchstone (cintdmani). If a small particle of touchstone touches an iron rod, that rod will immediately turn to
gold. Of course, in this material world we have no experience with
such a thing as touchstone, but according to Brahma-samhita all
the abodes in Krsnaloka are composed of touchstone. Similarly,
the trees there are called desire trees (kalpa-vrksa) because one
can get whatever he desires from them. Here we can get only
mangoes from a mango tree, but in Krsnaloka we can get whatever we desire from any tree because the trees are kalpa-vrksa.
This is just a partial description of Krsnaloka, Krsna’s eternal
abode in the spiritual sky.

The conclusion, therefore, is not to try to elevate ourselves to
any material planet, because the same miserable conditions of
128 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

birth, old age, disease, and death exist in all of them. Scientists are
very proud of ‘‘scientific’’ advancement, but they have not been
able to check old age, disease, and death. They can manufacture
something to accelerate death, but nothing that can stop death.
That is not within their power.

Those who are intelligent are interested in putting an end to
birth, old age, disease, and death and entering into a spiritual life
full of eternality, bliss, and knowledge. The bhakti-yogi knows
that such a life is possible through practice of Krsna consciousness
and remembrance of Krsna at the time of death.

ananya-cetah satatam
yo mam smarati nityasah
tasyaham sulabhah partha
nitya-yuktasya yoginah

**For one who remembers Me without deviation, I am easy to obtain, O son of Prtha, because of his constant engagement in devotional service.’’ (Bg. 8.14) In this verse, the word nitya-yukta
means ‘‘continuously in trance.’’ Such a person who is continuously thinking of Krsna and always engaged in Krsna consciousness 1s the highest yogi. His attention is not diverted to
jnana-yoga, dhyana-yoga, or any other system. For him, there is
only one system—Krsna. Ananya-cetah means ‘“‘without deviation.’’ A Krsna conscious devotee is not disturbed by anything,
because his mind is always concentrated on Krsna. The word
satatam means that he is thinking of Krsna at all places and at all
times. When Krsna descended onto this earth, He appeared in
Vrndavana. Although I am presently living in America, my residence is in Vrndavana because I am always thinking of Krsna. AIthough I may be in a New York apartment, my consciousness is
there, and this is as good as being there.

Krsna consciousness means always living with Krsna in His
Spiritual planet. Because we are conscious of Krsna, we are already
living with Him. We simply have to wait to give up this material
body to go there. For one who remembers Krsna without deviation, He is easy to obtain. Zasyaham sulabhah partha: ‘‘I become

Destination After Death , 129

very cheap for them.”” For one who takes to Krsna consciousness,
the most valuable thing becomes very easy to obtain. Because one
is engaged in bhakti-yoga, Krsna becomes easily available. Why
should we try so hard to attain Krsna, when Krsna Himself says,
‘*I am easy to obtain’’? We have only to chant Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare twenty-four hours daily. There is no fast rule
and regulation. We can chant in the street or on the subway, in our
home or in our office. There is neither expenditure nor tax.
Actually Krsna, being omnipotent, is unconquerable, but it is
said that He is not only obtained but conquered through pure devotional service. As stated before, it is generally very difficult to
realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore one of His
names is Ajita, meaning, ‘‘He whom no one can conquer.” In
Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.3), Lord Brahma prays to Ajita,

jnane prayasam udapasya namanta eva
jivanti san-mukharitam bhavadiya-vartam

sthane sthitah sruti-gatam tanu-van-manobhir
ye prayaso ‘ita jito ‘py asi tais tri-lokyam

**O my dear Lord Ajita, those devotees who have thrown away the
impersonal conceptions of the Absolute Truth and have therefore
abandoned discussing empiric philosophical truths should hear
from self-realized devotees about Your holy name, form, pastimes, and qualities. They should completely follow the principles of devotional service and remain free from illicit sex,
gambling, intoxication, and animal slaughter. Surrendering themselves fully with body, words, and mind, they can live in any
asrama or social status. Indeed, You are conquered by such persons, although You are always unconquerable.”’

In this verse, the words jane prayasam refer to theosophists
and philosophers who are trying year after year and life after life to
understand God, or the Absolute Truth. Their attempts are like
those of the frog in a well trying to comprehend the vastness of the
Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Even our attempts to measure outer
Space are futile, to say nothing of the attempt to measure
130 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

God. Such attempts are doomed to failure; therefore SrimadBhdgavatam recommends that we abandon all attempts to
measure the Supreme. It is completely useless to try to understand
God by our limited knowledge, and an intelligent man understands this. We should become submissive and try to understand
that our position is that of a very insignificant segment in this creation. The words namanta eva indicate that we are just to become
submissive in order to understand the Supreme from a reliable
source. And what is that source? San-mukharitam: from the lips of
realized souls. Arjuna is understanding God directly from the lips
of Krsna, and we have to understand God through the lips of Arjuna or his bona fide representative. We can understand the transcendental nature of God only from a reliable source. That source
may be Indian, European, American, Japanese, Hindu, Muslim,
or whatever. The circumstances are not important. We just have
to try to understand by hearing and then try to put the process to
practice in our daily lives. By becoming submissive, hearing from
the right source, and trying to apply the teachings in our daily
lives, we can become conquerors of the Supreme. For one who
does this, Lord Krsna becomes easily available. Ordinarily, God
realization is very difficult, but it is very easy for one who submissively hears (Sruti-gatam).

There are two processes by which we can acquire knowledge:
One is the ascending process (droha-pantha), and the other is the
descending process (avaroha-pantha). By the ascending process,
One attempts to understand God by his own efforts—by philosophizing, meditating, or speculating. According to the descending
process, one acquires knowledge simply by hearing from an authority, from the bona fide spiritual master and the scriptures. As
far as the ascending process is concerned, it is stated in Brahmasamhita (5.34),

panthas tu koti-Sata-vatsara-sampragamyo
vayor athapi manaso muni-pungavanam

so ‘py asti yat-prapada-simny avicintya-tattve
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami

 

Destination After Death 131

‘*! worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, only the tips of the toes
of whose lotus feet are approached by the yogis and jndanis, who
travel for billions of years at ‘the speed of the wind or mind.” We
can all understand how great the speed of mind is. Although sitting in New York City, I can immediately think of India, which is
thousands and thousands of miles away. It is herein stated that
even if one travels at this speed for billions of years, Krsna will
still remain inconceivable. The word muni-pungavanam refers to a
great thinker, not an ordinary man. Even if such a great thinker
travels for millions of years at the speed of mind, he will still find
the Supreme Person unknowable. Yet for one who takes undeviatingly to this path of Krsna consciousness, Krsna is easy to
obtain. Why is this? Nitya-yuktasya yoginah: *‘Because such a person is constantly engaged in My devotional service, and I cannot
forget him.”’ So this is the process. We have only to become submissive to attract the attention of God. My Guru Maharaja used to
say, ‘“‘Don’t try to see God, but work in such a way that God will
see you. God will take care of you. You don’t have to try to see
Him.”’

This should be our attitude. We should not think, ‘‘I want to
see God. O God, please come and stand before me. Be like my servant.’’ But since God is no one’s servant, we have to oblige Him
by our love and service. We all know how difficult it is to see the
king or president of a country. It is practically impossible for an
Ordinary man to get an interview with such an important person,
to say nothing of having this important person come and stand
before him. Yet people are demanding that the Supreme Personality of Godhead come and stand before them. It is our nature
to hanker after Krsna, because He is the most attractive, most
beautiful, most opulent, most powerful, most learned, and most
famous person in the universe. Everyone hankers after these
qualities, and Krsna is the reservoir of all these qualities, and He
possesses them in full. Krsna is the reservoir of everything (raso
vai sah), therefore when we hanker after beauty or power or
knowledge or fame, we should just turn our attention to Krsna.
Then we will automatically get whatever our hearts desire.
CHAPTER TEN

The Path of Perfection

mam upetya punar janma
-duhkhalayam asasvatam

napnuvanti mahatmanah
samsiddhim paramam gatah

‘*After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogis in devotion,
never return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries,
because they have attained the highest perfection.’’ (Bg. 8.15)

This material world is certified by its very creator, the Supreme
Lord, as duhkhalayam, which means ‘“‘the place of miseries.”
Since this is the case, how can we possibly make it comfortable by
so-called scientific advancement? Duhkha means ‘‘misery’’ or
‘‘suffering,’’ and real suffering is birth, old age, disease, and
death. We have set these problems aside because we cannot solve
them; therefore scientists concentrate on atomic bombs and
spaceships. Why can’t they solve these important problems that
are always causing us to suffer? Obviously, they haven’t the power
to do so. |

But ‘in this verse, Sri Krsna gives the solution: mdm upetya
punar janma. That is, “If one attains My platform, he does not
come back again to this place of misery.’’ Unfortunately, in the
mode of ignorance, people cannot understand that they are in a

133
 

134 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

miserable situation. Animals cannot understand their miserable
situations because they haven’t the reason. Man possesses reason
whereby he can understand this, but in this age people are using
their reasoning power in order to gratify their animal propensities.
Reason should be used in getting liberated from this miserable
condition. However, if we engage in Krsna consciousness twentyfour hours a day without deviation, we will go to Krsna and not be
reborn in this miserable world. Mahatmanah samsiddhim paramam
gatah: those great souls who have attained the highest perfection,
Krsna consciousness, are forever freed from misery. In this verse,
the word mahatma refers to a Krsna conscious man eligible to
enter the abode of Krsna. The word mahatma does not refer to a
political leader like Mahatma Gandhi but to a great soul, a pure
devotee of Krsna.

When Krsna says that the mahatma enters His abode, He ts
referring to His transcendental kingdom, Goloka Vrndavana. The
Vrndavana from which I have come is called Bhauma Vrndavana,
which means it is the same Vrndavana descended on this earth.
Just as Krsna descended on this earth through His own internal
potency, similarly His dhama, His abode, also descends. In other
words, when Krsna descends on this earth, He manifests Himself
in that particular land, Vrndavana, and therefore that land is also
sacred. Apart from this, Krsna has His own abode in the spiritual
sky, and this is called Goloka Vrndavana.

The mahatma prepares in this life to enter that transcendental
abode. The human form of life can utilize nature to its best interest. Animals cannot. These facilities should be utilized in striving to become a mahatma and putting an end to birth in this
material world, which is characterized by threefold miseries. The
threefold miseries are those that pertain to the mind or the body,
natural disturbances, and miseries caused by other living entities.
Whatever our position in this material world, there is always some
kind of misery being inflicted upon us. Sri Krsna frankly says that
it is not possible to avoid misery in this material world, because
this world is meant for misery. Unless miseries are present, we
cannot come to Krsna consciousness. Misery serves as an impetus
to help elevate us to Krsna consciousness. An intelligent person

The Path of Perfection 135

understands that although he does not want misery, miseries are
being inflicted upon him by force. No one wants misery, but a person should be intelligent enough to question, ‘‘Why are these
miseries being forced upon me?’’ Unfortunately, in modern
Civilization, people try to set miseries aside, thinking, “‘Oh, why
suffer? Let me cover my miseries with some intoxication.”
However, the miseries of life cannot be solved by artificial intoxication. As soon as the intoxication 1s over, one returns to the
same point. The miseries of material existence can be solved only
by Krsna consciousness. If we always remain in Krsna consciousness, we'll be transferred to Krsna’s planet upon leaving this material body. That is called the highest perfection.

People may inquire, ‘‘Well, you say that entering Krsna’s
planet constitutes the highest perfection, but we are interested in
going to the moon. Is this not a kind of perfection?’’ Well, the
desire to enter the higher planets is always there in the human
mind. In fact, another name for the living entity is sarva-gata,
which means that he wants to travel everywhere. That is the
nature of the living entity. Americans who have money often go to
India, Europe, or some other country, because they do not like to
Stagnate in one place. That is our nature, and therefore we are interested in going to the moon or wherever. But according to
Krsna, even if we attain the higher planets, we are still subject to
the material miseries.

abrahma-bhuvanal lokah
punar @vartino. 'rjuna

mam upetya tu kaunteya
punar janma na vidyate

‘*From the highest planet in the material world down to the
lowest, all are places of misery wherein repeated birth and death
take place. But one who attains to My abode, O son of Kunti,
never takes birth again.’ (Bg. 8.16)

The universe is divided into fourteen planetary systems (caturdasa-bhuvana)—seven lower and seven higher. The
earth is situated in the middle. In this verse, Sri Krsna says,

—Abrahma-bhuvanal lokah: even if one enters the highest planet,
136 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Brahmaloka, there is still birth and death. The words punar avartinah mean ‘‘returning again,”’ or ‘‘repetition of birth and death.”’
We are changing bodies just as we change clothes, leaving one
body and entering another. All planets are filled with living entities. We shouldn’t think that only the earth is inhabited. There
are living entities on the higher planets and lower planets as well.
From our experience, we can see that no place on earth is vacant
of living entities. If we dig into the earth, we find some worms,
and if we go into the water we find many aquatics. The air is filled
with birds, and if we analyze outer space, we will find many living
entities. It is illogical to conclude that there are no living entities
on the other planets. To the contrary, they are full of living
entities.

In any case, Krsna says that from the highest planet to the
lowest planet, there is repetition of birth and death. Yet again, as
in the former verse, He says, mam upetya: ‘“‘If you reach My
planet, you don’t have to return to this miserable material world.”
To stress this point, Sri Krsna repeats that upon reaching Goloka
Vrndavana, His eternal abode, one is liberated from the cycle of
birth and death and attains eternal life. It is the duty of human life
to understand these problems and attain a blissful, eternal life that
is full of knowledge. Unfortunately, people in this age have
forgotten the aim of life. Why? Durasaya ye bahir-artha-maninah
(Bhag. 7.5.31). People have been trapped by the material glitter—
by skyscrapers, big factories, and political activities. People do not
stop to consider that however big the skyscraper may be, they will
not be allowed to live there indefinitely. We should not spoil our
energy, therefore, in building great cities but should employ our
energy to elevate ourselves to Krsna consciousness. Krsna consciousness is not a religious formula or some spiritual recreation
but is the most important factor in our lives. 7

People are interested in attaining higher planets because there
one’s enjoyment is a thousand times greater and the duration of
life much longer.

sahasra-yuga-paryantam
ahar yad brahmano viduh

 

The Path of Perfection 137

ratrim yuga-sahasrantam
te ‘ho-ratra-vido janah
(Bg. 8.17)

The duration of the material universe is limited. It is manifested in
cycles of kalpas. A kalpa is a day of Brahma, and one day of
Brahma consists of a thousand cycles of four yugas, or ages: Satya,
Treta, Dvapara, and Kali. The cycle of Satya is characterized by
virtue, wisdom, and religion, there being practically no ignorance
and vice, and the yuga lasts 1,728,000 years. In the Tretaé-yuga
vice is introduced, and this yuga lasts 1,296,000 years. In the
Dvapara-yuga there is an even greater decline in virtue and
religion, vice increasing, and this yuga lasts 864,000 years. And
finally, in Kali-yuga (the yuga we have now been experiencing
over the past 5,000 years), there is an abundance of strife, ignorance, irreligion, and vice, true virtue being practically nonexistent, and this yuga lasts 432,000 years. In Kali-yuga vice
increases to such a point that at the termination of the yuga, the
Supreme Lord Himself appears as the Kalki-avatara, vanquishes
the demons, saves His devotees, and commences another Satyayuga. Then the process is set rolling again. These four yugas rotating a thousand times comprise one day of Brahma, the creator
god, and the same number comprise one night. Brahma lives one
hundred of such ‘‘years’’ and then dies. These ‘‘hundred years”’
by earth calculations total 311 trillion and 40 million earth years.
By these calculations, the life of Brahma seems fantastic and interminable, but from the viewpoint of eternity, it is as brief as a
lightning flash. In the Causal Ocean there are innumerable
Brahmas rising and disappearing like bubbles in the Atlantic.
Brahma and his creation are all part of the material universe, and
therefore they are in constant flux.

In the material universe, not even Brahma is free from the process of birth, old age, disease, and death. Brahma, however, is
directly engaged in the service of the Supreme Lord in the
management of this universe; therefore he at once attains liberation. Elevated sannyasis are promoted to Brahma’s particular
planet, Brahmaloka, which is the highest planet in the material
138 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

universe and which survives all the heavenly planets in the upper
Strata of the planetary system, but in due course Brahma and all
inhabitants of Brahmaloka are subject to death, according to the
law of material nature. So even if we live millions and trillions of
years, we have to die. Death cannot be avoided. Throughout the
entire universe the process of creation and annihilation is taking
place, as described in the next verse:

avyaktad vyaktayah sarvah
prabhavanty ahar-agame

ratry-agame praliyante
tatraivavyakta-samjnake

‘**When Brahma’s day is manifest, this multitude of living entities
comes into being, and at the arrival of Brahma’s night they are all
annihilated.”’ (Bg. 8.18)

Unless we go to the spiritual sky, there is no escaping this process of birth and death, creation and annihilation. When Brahma’s
days are finished, all these planetary systems are covered by water,
and when Brahma§ rises again, creation takes place. The word ahar
means ‘‘in the daytime,”’ which is twelve hours of Brahma’s life.
During this time this material manifestation—all these planets—
are seen, but when night comes they are all merged in water. That
is, they are annihilated. The word ratry-agame means ‘‘at the fall
of night.’’ During this time, all these planets are invisible because
they are inundated with water. This flux is the nature of the material world.

bhuta-gramah sa evayam
bhutva bhutva praliyate

ratry-agame ‘vasah partha prabhavaty ahar-agame

‘*Again and again the day comes, and this host of beings is active;
and again the night falls, O Partha, and they are helplessly
dissolved.’ (Bg. 8.19) Although we do not want devastation,
devastation is inevitable. At night, everything is flooded, and

The Path of Perfection 139

when day appears, gradually the waters disappear. For instance, on
this one planet, the surface is three-fourths covered with water.
Gradually, land is emerging, and the day will come when there
will no longer be water but simply land. That is nature’s process.

paras tasmat tu bhavo ‘nyo
‘vyakto ‘vyaktat sanatanah

yah sa sarvesu bhutesu
nasyatsu na vinasyati

‘*Yet there is another nature, which is eternal and is transcendental to this manifested and nonmanifested matter. It is supreme and
is never annihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that
part remains as it is.’ (Bg. 8.20)

We cannot calculate the length and breadth of this universe.
There are millions and millions of universes like this within this
material world, and above this material world is the spiritual sky,
where the planets are all eternal. Life on those planets is also eternal. This material manifestation comprises only one fourth of the
entire creation. Ekamsena sthito jagat. Ekamsena means ‘‘one
fourth.’ Three fourths of the creation is beyond this material sky,
which is covered like a ball. This covering extends millions and
millions of miles, and only after penetrating that covering can one
enter the spiritual sky. That is open sky, eternal sky. In this verse
it is stated, paras tasmat tu bhavo ‘nyah: ‘‘Yet there is another
nature.’ The word bhava means another ‘‘nature.’’ We have experience only with this material nature, but from Bhagavad-gita
we understand that there is a spiritual nature that is transcendental
and eternal. We actually belong to that spiritual nature, because
we are Spirit, but presently we are covered by this material body,
and therefore we are a combination of the material and spiritual.
Just as we can understand that we are a combination of both
natures, we should understand also that there is a spiritual world
beyond this material universe. Spiritual nature is called superior,
and material nature is called inferior, because without spirit, matter cannot move.

This cannot be understood by experimental knowledge. We
 

140 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

may look at millions and millions of stars through telescopes, but
we cannot approach what we are seeing. Similarly, our senses are
so insufficient that we cannot approach an understanding of the
Spiritual nature. Being incapable, we should not try to understand
God and His kingdom by experimental knowledge. Rather, we
have to understand by hearing Bhagavad-gita. There is no other
way. If we want to know who our father is, we simply have to
believe our mother. We have no other way of knowing except by
her. Similarly, in order to understand who God is and what His
nature is, we have to accept the information given in Bhagavadgita. There is no question of experimenting. Once we become advanced in Krsna consciousness, we will realize God and His
nature. We can come to understand, ‘Yes, there is God and a
spiritual kingdom, and I have to go there. Indeed, I must prepare
myself to go there.”

The word vyakta means ‘‘manifest.’’ This material universe
that we are seeing (or partially seeing) before us is manifest. At
least at night we can see that stars are twinkling and that there are
innumerable planets. But beyond this vyakta is another nature,
- Called avyakta, which is unmanifest. That is the spiritual nature,
which is sanatana, eternal. This material nature has a beginning
and an end, but that spiritual nature has neither beginning nor
end. This material sky is within the covering of the mahat-tattva,
matter. This matter is like a cloud. When there is a storm, it appears that the entire sky is covered with clouds, but actually only
an insignificant part of the sky is covered. Because we are very
minute, if just a few hundred miles are covered, it appears that the
entire sky is covered. As soon as a wind comes and blows the
clouds away, we can see the sky once again. Like the clouds, this

mahat-tattva covering has a beginning and an end. Similarly, the

material body, being a part of material nature, has a beginning and
an end. The body is born, grows, stays for some time, leaves some
by-products, dwindles, and then vanishes. Whatever material
manifestation we see undergoes these six basic transformations.
Whatever exists within material nature will ultimately be vanquished. But herein Krsna is telling us that beyond this vanishing,

The Path of Perfection 141

cloudlike material nature, there is a superior nature, which is
sanatana, eternal. Yah sa sarvesu bhiitesu nasyatsu na vinasyati.
When this material manifestation is annihilated, that spiritual sky
remains. This is called avyakto ‘vyaktat.

In the Second Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, we find a description of the spiritual sky and the people who live there. Its nature
and features are also discussed. From this Second Canto we understand that there are spiritual airplanes in the spiritual sky, and
that the living entities there—who are all liberated—travel like
lightning on those planes throughout the spiritual sky. This material world is simply an imitation; whatever we see here Is simply
a Shadow of what exists there. The material world is like a cinema,
wherein we see but an imitation or a shadow of the real thing that
is existing. This material world is only a shadow. As stated in
Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.1.1), yatra tri-sargo ’mrsa: *‘This illusory
material world is a combination of matter.’’ In store windows we
often see mannequins, but no sane man thinks that these mannequins are real. He can see that they are imitations. Similarly,
whatever we see here may be beautiful, just as a mannequin may
be beautiful, but it is simply an imitation of the real beauty found
in the spiritual world. As Sridhara Svami says, yat satyatayd mithya
sargo ‘pi satyavat pratiyate: the spiritual world is real, and this
unreal material manifestation only appears to be real. We must
understand that reality will never be vanquished and that in essence reality means eternality. Therefore material pleasure, which
is temporary, is not actual; real pleasure exists in Krsna. Consequently, those who are after the reality don’t participate in this
shadow pleasure. |

Thus when everything in the material world is annihilated, that
Spiritual nature remains eternally, and it is the purpose of human
life to reach that spiritual sky. Unfortunately, people are not aware
of the reality of the spiritual sky. According to Srimad-Bhagavatam
(7.5.31), na te viduh svartha-gatim hi visnum: people do not know
their self-interest. They do not know that human life is meant for
understanding spiritual reality and preparing oneself to be
transferred to that reality. No one can remain here in this material
142 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

world. All Vedic literatures instruct usin this way. Jamasi ma jyotir
gama: ‘‘Don’t remain in this darkness. Go to the light.’’ According to the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita (15.6),

na tad bhasayate suryo

na sasanko na pavakah
yad gatva na nivartante

tad dhama paramam mama

‘**That abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by
electricity. One who reaches it never returns to this material
world.’’ This material world is dark by nature, and we are artificialJy illuminating it with electric lights, fire, and so on. In any
case, its nature is dark, but the spiritual nature is full of light.
When the sun Is present, there is no darkness; similarly, every
planet in the spiritual sky is self-luminous. Therefore there is no
darkness, nor is there need of sun, moon, or electricity. The word
suryo means ‘‘sun,’’ sasanko means ‘“‘moon,”’ and pavakah means
‘‘fire’’ or ‘‘electricity.”’ So these are not required in the spiritual
sky for illumination. And again, Krsna herein says, yad gatva na
nivartante tad dhama paramam mama: ‘‘That is My supreme
abode, and one who reaches it never returns to this material
world.’” This is stated throughout Bhagavad-gita. Again, in this
Eighth Chapter (Bg. 8.21),

avyakto ‘ksara ity uktas

tam ahuh paramam gatim
yam prapya na nivartante

tad dhama paramam mama

‘‘That supreme abode is called unmanifested and infallible, and it
is the supreme destination. When one goes there, he never comes
back. That is My supreme abode.’’ Again, the word avyakta,
meaning ‘‘unmanifest,’’ is used. The word aksara means ‘‘that
which is never annihilated,”’ or ‘‘that which is infallible.’’ This
means that since the supreme abode is eternal, it is not subject to
the six transformations mentioned previously.

The Path of Perfection 143

Because we are presently covered by a dress of material senses,
we cannot see the spiritual world, and the spiritual nature is inconceivable for us. Yet we can feel that there is something spiritual
present. Even a man completely ignorant of the spiritual nature
can somehow feel its presence. One need only analyze his body
silently: ‘“‘What am I? Am I this finger? Am I this body? Am I this
hair? No, | am not this, and I am not that. I am something other
than this body. I am something beyond this body. What is that?
That is the spiritual.’’ In this way, we can feel or sense the presence of spirituality within this matter. We can sense the absence
of spirit when a body is dead. If we witness someone dying, we can
sense that something is leaving the body. Although we do not
have the eyes to see it, that something Is spirit. Its presence in the
body is explained in the very beginning of Bhagavad-gita (2.17):

avinasi tu tad viddhi

yena sarvam idam tatam
vinasam avyayasyasya

na kascit kartum arhati

‘*Know that which pervades the entire body is indestructible. No
one is able to destroy the imperishable soul.”’

Spiritual existence is eternal, whereas the body is not. It is said
that the spiritual atmosphere is avyakta, unmanifest. How, then,
can it be manifest for us? Making the unmanifest manifest is this
very process of Krsna consciousness. According to Padma Purana,

atah Sri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
svayam eva sphuraty adah

‘*‘No one can understand Krsna as He is by the blunt material
senses. But He reveals Himself to the devotees, being pleased
with them for their transcendental loving service unto Him.”’ In
this verse, the word indriyaih means ‘“‘the senses.’’ We have five
senses for gathering knowledge (eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and
 

 

144 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

skin), and five senses for working (voice, hands, legs, genitals,
and anus). These ten senses are under the control of the mind. It
_ is stated in this verse that with these dull material senses, we cannot understand Krsna’s name, form, and so forth. Why is this?
Krsna is completely spiritual, and He is also absolute. Therefore
His name, form, qualities, and paraphernalia are also spiritual.
Due to material conditioning, or material bondage, we cannot
presently understand what ts spiritual, but this ignorance can be
removed by chanting Hare Krsna. If a man is sleeping, he can be
awakened by sound vibration. You can call him, ‘Come on, it’s
time to get up!’ Although the person Is unconscious, hearing is so
prominent that even a sleeping man can be awakened by sound
vibration. Similarly, overpowered by this material conditioning,
Our spiritual consciousness is presently sleeping, but it can be
revived by this transcendental vibration of Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare. As stated before, Hare refers to the energy of
the Lord, and Krsna and Rama refer to the Lord Himself.
Therefore, when we chant Hare Krsna, we are praying, ‘‘O Lord,
O energy of the Lord, please accept me.’’ We have no other prayer
than ‘‘Please accept me.’’ Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught us
that we should simply cry and pray that the Lord accept us. As
Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself prayed,

ayi nanda-tanuja kinkaram
patitam mam visame bhavambudhau
krpaya tava pada-pankajasthita-dhuli-sadrsam vicintaya

‘**O Krsna, son of Nanda, somehow or other I have fallen into this
ocean of nescience and ignorance. Please pick me up and place me
as one of the atoms at Your lotus feet.’ If a man has fallen into the
ocean, his only hope for survival is that someone comes to pick
him up. He only has to be lifted one inch above the water in order
to feel immediate relief. Similarly, as soon as we take to Krsna
consciousness, we are lifted up, and we feel immediate relief.

The Path of Perfection 145

We cannot doubt that the transcendental is there. Bhagavadgita is being spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself; therefore we should not doubt His word. The only problem is
feeling and understanding what He is telling us. That understanding must be developed gradually, and that knowledge will be
revealed by the chanting of Hare Krsna. By this simple process, we
can come to understand the spiritual kingdom, the self, the material world, God, the nature of our conditioning, liberation from
material bondage, and everything else. This is called ceto-darpanamarjanam, cleaning the dusty mirror of the impure mind.

Whatever the case, we must have faith in the word of Krsna.
When we purchase a ticket on Pan American or Air India, we have
faith that that company will take us to our destination. Faith is created because the company is authorized. Our faith should not be
blind; therefore we should accept that which is recognized.
Bhagavada-gita has been recognized as authorized scripture in India
for thousands of years, and even outside India there are many
scholars, religionists, and philosophers who have accepted
Bhagavad-gita as authoritative. It 1s said that even such a great
scientist as Albert Einstein was reading Bhagavad-gita regularly.
So we should not doubt Bhagavad-gita's authenticity.

Therefore when Lord Krsna says that there is a supreme abode
and that we can go there, we should have faith that such an abode
exists. Many philosophers think that the spiritual abode is impersonal or void. Impersonalists like the Sankarites and Buddhists
generally speak of the void or emptiness, but Bhagavad-gita does
not disappoint us in this way. The philosophy of voidism has
simply created atheism, because it is the nature of the living entity
to want enjoyment. As soon as he thinks that his future is void, he
will try to enjoy the variegatedness of this material life. Thus impersonalism leads to armchair philosophical discussions and attachment to material enjoyment. We may enjoy speculating, but
no real spiritual benefit can be derived from such speculation. _

Bhaktih paresanubhavo viraktir anyatra ca (Bhdg. 11.2.42).
Once we have developed the devotional spirit, we will become immediately detached from all kinds of material enjoyment. As soon
146 - THE PATH OF PERFECTION

as a hungry man eats, he feels immediate satisfaction and says,
‘No, I don’t want any more. I am satisfied.” This satisfaction 1s a
characteristic of the Krsna conscious man.

brahma-bhutah prasannatma
na socati na kanksati

samah sarvesu bhutesu
mad-bhaktim labhate param

‘“One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the
Supreme Brahman. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he
attains pure devotional service unto Me.”” (Bg. 18.54) |

As soon as one is spiritually realized, he feels full satisfaction
and no longer hankers after flickering material enjoyment. As
stated in the Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gita (2.59),

~ visaya vinivartante
niraharasya dehinah
rasa-varjam raso ‘py asya
param drstva nivartate

“*The embodied soul may be restricted from sense enjoyment,
though the taste for sense objects remains. But, ceasing such
engagements by experiencing a higher taste, he is fixed in consciousness.’ A doctor may tell a diseased man, ‘‘Don’t eat this.
Don’t eat that. Don’t have sex. Don’t. Don’t.”’ In this way, a diseased man is forced to accept so many “‘don’ts,”’ but inside he is
thinking, ‘‘Oh, if I can just get these things, Pll be happy.’ The
desires remain inside. However, when one is established in Krsna
consciousness, he is so strong inside that he doesn’t experience
the desire. Although he’s not impotent, he doesn’t want sex. He
can marry thrice, but still be detached. Param drstva nivartate.
When something superior is acquired, one naturally gives up all
inferior things. That which is superior is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, and atheism and impersonalism cannot give us this.
He is attained only by unalloyed devotion.

The Path of Perfection 147

purusah sa parah partha
bhaktya labhyas tv ananyaya
yasyantah-sthani bhutani
yena sarvam idam tatam

‘‘The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than all, is
attained by unalloyed devotion. Although He is present in His
abode, He is all-pervading, and everything is situated within
Him.” (Bg. 8.22) The words purusah sa parah indicate the supreme person who is greater than all others. This is not a void
speaking, but a person who has all the characteristics of personality in full. Just as we are talking face to face, when we reach the
Supreme abode we can talk to God face to face. We can play with
Him, eat with Him, and everything else. This state is not acquired
by mental speculation but by transcendental loving service (bhaktya labhyah). The words tv ananyaya indicate that this bhakti must
be without adulteration. [t must be unalloyed.

Although the Supreme Personality is a person and Is present in
His abode in the spiritual sky, He is so widespread that everything
is within Him. He is both inside and outside. Although God is
everywhere, He still has His kingdom, His abode. The sun may
pervade the universe with its sunshine, yet the sun itself is a
Separate entity.

In His supreme abode, the Supreme Lord has no rival.
Wherever we may be, we find a predominating personality. In the
United States, the predominating personality is the President.
However, when the next election comes, the President will have
SO many rivals, but in the spiritual sky the Supreme Lord has no
rival. Those who want to become rivals are placed in this material
world, under the conditions of material nature. In the spiritual sky
there is no rivalry, and all the inhabitants therein are liberated
souls. From Srimad-Bhagavatam we receive information that their
bodily features resemble gods. In some of the spiritual planets,
God manifests a two-armed form, and in others He manifests a
four-armed form. The living entities of those planets have corresponding features, and one cannot distinguish who is God and
who 1s not. This is called sa@rupya-mukti liberation, wherein one
 

148 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

has the same features as the Lord. There are five kinds of liberation: sayujya, sarupya, salokya, sarsti, and samipya. Sayujya-mukti
means merging into God’s impersonal effulgence, the brahmajyoti. We have discussed this, and have concluded that the attempt
to merge and lose individuality is not desirable and is very risky.
Sarupya-mukti means attaining a body exactly like God’s. Salokyamukti means living on the same planet with God. Sarsti-mukti
means having the opulence of God. For instance, God is very
powerful, and we can become powerful like Him. That is called
sarsti. Samipya-mukti means always remaining with God as one of
His associates. For instance, Arjuna is always with Krsna as His
friend, and this is called sa@mipya-mukti. We can attain any one of
these five types of liberation, but out of these five, sdyujya-mukti,
merging into the brahmajyoti, is rejected by Vaisnava philosophy.
According to the Vaisnava philosophy, we worship God as He is
and retain our separate identity eternally in order to serve Him.
According to the Mayavada philosophy, impersonalism, one tries
to lose his individual identity and merge into the existence of the
Supreme. That, however, is a suicidal policy and is not recommended by Krsna in Bhagavad-gita. ,

This has also been rejected by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
who advocated worship in separation. As stated before, the pure
devotee does not even want liberation; he simply asks to remain
Krsna’s devotee birth after birth. This is Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s prayer, and the words ‘“‘birth after birth’’ indicate
that there is no liberation. This means that the devotee doesn’t
care whether he is liberated or not. He simply wants to engage in
Krsna consciousness, to serve the Supreme Lord. Always wanting
to engage in God’s transcendental loving service is the symptom
of pure devotion. Of course, wherever a devotee is, he remains in
the spiritual kingdom, even though in the material body. On his
part, he does not demand any of the five types of liberation, nor
anything for his personal superiority or comfort. But in order to
associate with God in the spiritual planets, one must become His
pure devotee.

For those who are not pure devotees, Lord Krsna explains at
what times one should leave the body in order to attain liberation.

The Path of Perfection 149

yatra kale tv anavrttim
avrttim caiva yoginah

prayata yanti tam kalam
vaksyami bharatarsabha

‘*O best of the Bharatas, I shall now explain to you the different
times at which, passing away from this world, one does or does not
come back.”’ (Bg. 8.23) In India, unlike in the West, it is common
for astrologers to make minute calculations of the astronomical
Situation at the moment of one’s birth. Indeed, a person’s
horoscope is read not only when he is born but also when he dies,
in order to determine what his situation will be in the next life. All
this can be determined by astrological calculation. In this verse,
Lord Krsna is accepting those astrological principles, confirming
that if one leaves his body at a particular time, he may attain
liberation. If one dies at one moment, he may be liberated, or if he
dies at another moment, he may have to return to the material
world. It is all a question of ‘‘chance,’’ but that chance someway
or other is what one has. For the devotee, however, there is no
question of chance. Whatever the astrological situation, the devotee in Krsna consciousness is guaranteed liberation. For others,
there are chances that if they leave their body at a particular moment, they may attain liberation and enter the spiritual kingdom,
or they may be reborn.

agnir jyotir ahah suklah
san-masa@ uttarayanam

tatra prayata gacchanti
brahma brahma-vido janah

‘‘Those who know the Supreme Brahman pass away from the
world during the influence of the fiery god, in the light, at an
auspicious moment, during the fortnight of the moon and the six
months when the sun travels in the north.” (Bg. 8.24) As we all
know, the sun’s movements are different: six months it is north of
the equator, and six months it is south. The sun is also moving,
according to Vedic calculations, and from Srimad-Bhagavatam we
 

150 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

are informed that the sun Its situated at the center of the universe.
Just as all the planets are moving, the sun is also moving at a
speed calculated to be sixteen thousand miles per second. If a person dies when the sun is in the northern hemisphere, he can attain
liberation. That is not only the verdict of Bhagavad-gita, but also
of other scriptures.

dhumo ratris tatha krsnah
san-masa daksinayanam

tatra candramasam jyotir
yogi prapya nivartate

‘**The mystic who passes away from this world during the smoke,
the night, the moonless fortnight, or in the six months when the
sun passes to the south, or who reaches the moon planet, again
comes back.”’ (Bg. 8.25) No one can say when he is going to die,
and in that sense the moment of one’s death is accidental.
However, for a devotee in Krsna consciousness, there is no question of ‘‘accidents.””

sukla-krsne gati hy ete
jagatah sasvate mate

ekaya yaty anavrttim
anyayavartate punah

*‘According to the Vedas, there are two ways of passing from this
world—one in light and one in darkness. When one passes in
light, he does not come back; but when one passes in darkness, he
returns.” (Bg. 8.26) The same description of departure and return
is quoted by Acarya Baladeva Vidyadbhisana from the Chdndogya
Upanisad. In such a way, those who are fruitive laborers and
philosophical speculators from time immemorial are constantly
going and coming. Actually they do not attain ultimate salvation,
for they do not surrender to Krsna.

naite srti partha janan
yogi muhyati kascana

The Path of Perfection 151

tasmat sarvesu kalesu
yoga-yukto bhavarjuna

*‘The devotees who know these two paths, O Arjuna, are never
bewildered. Therefore be always fixed in devotion.” (Bg. 8.27)
Herein the Lord confirms that there is no ‘‘chance’’ for one who
practices bhakti-yoga. His destination is certain. Whether he dies
when the sun is in the northern or southern hemisphere is of no
importance. As we have already stated, if one thinks of Krsna at
the time of death, he will at once be transferred to Krsna’s abode.
Therefore Krsna tells Arjuna to always remain in Krsna consciousness. This is possible through the chanting of Hare Krsna.
Since Krsna and His spiritual kingdom are nondifferent, being absolute, Krsna and His sound vibration are the same. Simply by
vibrating Krsna’s name, we can enjoy Krsna’s association. If we
are walking down the street chanting Hare Krsna, Krsna is also
going with us. If we walk down the street and look up at the sky,
we may see that the sun or the moon Is accompanying us. I can
recall about fifty years ago, when I was a householder, my second
son, who was about four years old at the time, was walking with
me down the street, and he suddenly asked me, ‘‘Father, why is
the moon going with us?”’

If a material object like the moon has the power to accompany
us, we can surely understand that the Supreme Lord, who is allpowerful, can always remain with us. Being omnipotent, He can
always keep us company, provided that we are also qualified to
keep His company. Pure devotees are always merged in the
thought of Krsna and are always remembering that Krsna is with
them. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu has confirmed the absolute
nature of Krsna in His Siksdstaka (verse 2):

namnam akari bahudha nija-sarva-saktis
tatrarpita niyamitah smarane na kalah

etadrsi tava krpa bhagavan mamapi
durdaivam idrsam ihajani nanuragah

‘‘My Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, in Your holy
152 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

name there is all good fortune for the living entity, and therefore
You have many names, such as Krsna and Govinda, by which You
expand Yourself. You have invested all Your potencies in those
names, and there are no hard-and-fast rules for remembering
them. My dear Lord, although You bestow such mercy upon the
fallen, conditioned souls by liberally teaching Your holy names, I
am so unfortunate that I commit offenses while chanting the holy
name, and therefore I do not achieve attachment for chanting.”

We may take the effort to spend a great deal of money and attempt to build or establish a temple for Krsna, but if we do so we
must observe many rules and regulations and see properly to the
temple’s management. But herein it is confirmed that simply by
chanting, any man can have the benefit of keeping company with
Krsna. Just as Arjuna is deriving benefit by being in the same
chariot with Lord Sri Krsna, we can also benefit by associating
with Krsna through the chanting of His holy names—Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,
Rama Rama, Hare Hare. This maha-mantra is not my personal
concoction but is authorized by Lord Caitanya Mahdaprabhu, who
is considered to be not only an authority but the incarnation of
Lord Sri Krsna Himself. It was Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu who
said, ‘‘O Lord, You are so kind to the people of this material world
that You expand Yourself in Your holy name so that they can
associate with You.”

Although the maha-mantra is in the Sanskrit language and
many people do not know its meaning, it ts still so attractive that
people participate when it is chanted publicly. When chanting the
maha-mantra, we are completely safe, even in this most dangerous
position. We should always be aware that in this material world,
we are always in a dangerous position. Srimad-Bhagavatam confirms: padam padam yad vipadam na tesam. \n this world, there is
danger at every step. The devotees of the Lord, however, are not
meant to remain in this miserable, dangerous place. Therefore we
should take care to advance in Krsna consciousness while in this
human form. Then our happiness is assured.

 

Appendixes
About the Author

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupdada appeared in this world in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his
Spiritual master, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvamt, in
Calcutta in 1922. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, a prominent religious
scholar and the founder of sixty-four Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic institutes), liked this educated young man and convinced him to
dedicate his life to teaching Vedic knowledge. Srila Prabhupada
became his student, and eleven years later (1933) at Allahabad he
became his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura requested Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge through the English language. In the years that followed,
Srila Prabhupada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-gita,
assisted the Gaudiya Matha in its work and, in 1944, without assistance, started an English fortnightly magazine, edited it, typed the
manuscripts, and checked the galley proofs. He even distributed
the individual copies and struggled to maintain the publication.
Once begun, the magazine never stopped; it is now being continued by his disciples in the West and is published in over twenty
languages.

Recognizing Srila Prabhupdda’s philosophical learning and devotion, the Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with
the title ‘‘Bhaktivedanta.”’ In 1950, at the age of fifty-four, Srila
Prabhupada retired from married life, adopting the va@naprastha
(retired) order to devote more timé to his studies and writing.
Srila Prabhupada traveled to the holy city of Vrndavana, where he
lived in very humble circumstances in the historic medieval temple of Radha-Damodara. There he engaged for several years in
deep study and writing. He accepted the renounced order of life
(sannyasa) in 1959. At Radha-Damodara, Srila Prabhupada began
work on his life’s masterpiece: a multivolume translation of and
commentary on the eighteen-thousand-verse Srimad-Bhagavatam
(Bhagavata Purana). He also wrote Easy Journey to Other Planets.

After publishing three volumes of the Bhagavatam, Srila

155
156 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Prabhupada came to the United States, in 1965, to fulfill the mission of his spiritual master. Subsequently, His Divine Grace wrote
more than sixty volumes of authoritative translations, commentaries, and summary studies of the philosophical and religious
Classics of India. |

In 1965, when he first arrived by freighter in New York City,
Srila Prabhupada was practically penniless. It was after almost a
year of great difficulty that he established the International Society
for Krishna Consciousness in July of 1966. Before his passing
away on November 14, 1977, he guided the Society and saw it
grow to a worldwide confederation of more than one hundred
asramas, schools, temples, institutes, and farm communities.

In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vrindaban, an experimental Vedic community in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by
the success of New Vrindaban, now a thriving farm community of
more than one thousand acres, his students have since founded
several similar communities in the United States and abroad.

In 1972, His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary and secondary education in the West by founding the
Gurukula school in Dallas, Texas. Since then, under his supervision, his disciples have established children’s schools throughout
the United States and the rest of the world. As of 1980, there are
fourteen Gurukula schools worldwide, with the principal educational center now located in Vrndavana, India.

Srila Prabhupada also inspired the construction of several large
international cultural centers in India. The center at Sridhama
Mayapur in West Bengal is the site for a planned spiritual city, an
ambitious project for which construction will extend over the next
decade. In Vrndavana, India, is the magnificent Krsna-Balarama
Temple and International Guesthouse. There is also a major
cultural and educational center in Bombay. Other centers are
planned in a dozen other important locations on the Indian
subcontinent. ,

Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution, however, is
his books. Highly respected by the academic community for their
authoritativeness, depth, and clarity, they are used as standard
textbooks in numerous college courses. His writings have been

The Author 157

translated into over thirty languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust, established in 1972 exclusively to publish the works of His
Divine Grace, has thus become the world’s largest publisher of
books in the field of Indian religion and philosophy.

In just twelve years, in spite of his advanced age, Srila Prabhupada circled the globe fourteen times on lecture tours that took
him to six continents. In spite of such a vigorous schedule, Srila
Prabhupada continued to write prolifically. His writings constitute
a veritable library of Vedic philosophy, religion, literature, and
culture.
References

 

The text of The Path of Perfection is confirmed by standard Vedic
authorities. The following authentic scriptures are specifically
cited in this volume:

Bhagavada-gita, 1-2, 5-6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 18, 22, 25, 26, 30,
32-33, 35, 36, 37-38, 44, 45, 48, 51, 52, 55, 57, 59, 59-60,
63, 63-64, 65, 66, 67, 69, 70-71, 73, 76, 77, 78, 80, 81, 84,
84-85, 85, 86, 87, 88-89, 91, 94, 94-95, 95, 95-96, 97,
99-101, 102, 104, 106, 107, 108, 112, 115, 118, 121,
121-22, 123, 124, 128, 133, 135, 136-37, 138, 139, 142,
143, 146, 147, 149, 150, 150-51

Bhagavata. See: Srimad-Bhagavatam

Brahma-samhita, 10, 28, 29, 29-30, 30-31, 53, 53-54, 79,
83-84, 116-17, 127, 130-31

Brhan-naradiya Purana, 38-39
Caitanya-caritamrta, 25, 36
Katha Upanisad, 69
Narada-pancaratra, 88

Padma Purana, 27, 29, 143
Sad-gosvamy-astaka, 81-82

Siksdstaka, 2, 112, 115, 151-52

159

 
 

160 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Srimad-Bhdgavatam, 22-23, 23, 33-34, 34, 41-42, 43, 46, 60-61,
65, 108-9, 117, 126, 129, 136, 141, 145, 152

Stotra-ratna, 66
Upadesamrta, 68, 74-75
Vedanta-sutra, 9, 28, 43

Visnu Purana, 22

 

Glossary

A

Arjuna—the intimate friend of Lord Krsna who heard Bhagavadgita from Him on the battlefield of Kuruksetra.

Asrama—the four spiritual orders of Vedic society: celibate student, householder, retired, and renounced.

Astanga-yoga—the eight-step process of mystic meditation taught
by Patanyalt.

Avatara—a ‘“‘descent,’’ an appearance of the Supreme Lord in
this world.

B

Bhagavad-gita—the discourse between the Supreme Lord,
Krsna, and His devotee Arjuna expounding devotional service as both the principal means and the ultimate end of
Spiritual perfection.

Bhakti-yoga—the process of reestablishing one’s personal relationship with the Supreme Lord by devotional service.
Brahmacari—one in the first order of spiritual life, a celibate

Student.

Brahman—the Absolute Truth; especially the impersonal aspect
of the Absolute.

Brahmana—a member of the intelligent and priestly class.

C

Caitanya Mahaprabhu—Lord Krsna Himself, appearing as the
special incarnation for this age and the deliverer of the process of chanting the Supreme Lord’s holy names.

Causal Ocean—the corner of the spiritual universe in which the
Lord in His form as Maha-Visnu lies down to create the entirety of material universes.

161
162 THE PATH OF PERFECTION
D

Daridra-narayana—‘‘poor Narayana,’ a misconception of impersonalists that the common man is equal to God.

Dhyana-yoga—the process of linking with the Supreme by
meditating on the Supersoul tn the heart.

Dvapara-yuga—the third in the cycle of four ages. See also: Yugas

G

Goloka Vrndavana—the highest spiritual planet, Lord Krsna’s
personal abode. |

Gopis—Krsna’s cowherd girl friends, His most confidential
devotees.

Gosvamis, the six—Rtpa, Sanadtana, Raghunatha dasa, Gopala
Bhatta, Raghunatha Bhatta, and Jiva Gosvamis, immediate
followers of Lord Caitanya Mahadprabhu who were empowered by Him to establish the preaching of His movement
all over the world.

Govinda—Lord Krsna, the giver of pleasure to the cows, the land,
and the senses.

Grhastha—a householder, member of the second spiritual order
of Vedic society.

H

Hari-nama—the holy name of the Supreme Lord Hari (Krsna).
Hatha-yoga— See: Astanga-yoga

J

Jagannatha—the Supreme Lord Visnu appearing in His Deity
form in the city of Puri in Orissa. The worshipable Deity of
Lord Caitanya Mahdaprabhu. ,

Jnana-yoga—the process of linking with the Supreme by cultivation of knowledge.

Jnanis—those who practice //ana-yoga.

K

Kali-yuga—the current age of quarrel, begun 5,000 years ago and
scheduled to last 427,000 more years.

 

Glossary 163

Karma-yoga—the process of linking with the Supreme by surrendering the results of fruitive work.

Kirtana—the devotional process of chanting; glorification of the
holy names of the Supreme Lord.

Krsnaloka— See: Goloka Vrndavana

Ksatriyas—warriors and administrators, the second occupational
order of Vedic society.

M

Maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance:
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare
Mantra—a Vedic sound vibration that can deliver the mind from
illusion.
Maya—the material energy, the Supreme Lord’s deluding
potency.
Mrdanga—an oblong clay drum used in congregational chanting
of the Lord’s holy names.

N

Nrsimhadeva—the appearance of Lord Visnu as half-lion, halfman to protect His devotee Prahlada and kill the demon
Hiranyakasipu.

O

Orm(kara) —the sacred seed-syllable in the Vedas which is the
compact representation of the Absolute Truth.

P

Prema-bhakti—perfected devotional service on the platform of
pure ecstatic love of God. —

R

Radha—the personal consort of Lord Krsna, His internal pleasure
potency.

Rama—the Supreme Lord, who is the reservoir of all pleasure.

Ramanujacarya—the great Vaisnava spiritual master who reestablished the ancient line of disciplic succession from the
 

 

164 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

goddess of fortune (Sri-sampradaya) in this age.
Rasagullas—curd balls boiled in sugar juice.

S
Samosas—deep-fried vegetable pies.
Sankhya-yoga—the process of linking with the Supreme by intellectually tracing out the source of creation.
Sankirtana— See: Kirtana
Sannyasi—one in the renounced order of life, the highest of the
four spiritual divisions of Vedic society.
Sastras—revealed scriptures. |

Satya-yuga—the first and purest in the cycle of four ages. See also:

Yugas

Srimad-Bhagavatam—the ‘‘spotless Purdna,’’ which presents
the entire science of God consciousness, without any tinge
of material religiosity.

Surabhi—the cows of the spiritual world, which can be milked to

; yield any destre.

Syamasundara—the “‘dark, beautiful boy’’ of Vrndavana, Lord

Krsna.
T
Treta-yuga—the second in the cycle of four ages. See also: Yugas
V

Vaisnavas—worshipers of the Supreme Lord, Visnu.

Vedas—the original revealed scriptures.

Visnu—the Supreme Lord in His opulent feature as the Lord of
Vaikuntha.

Visnu-miurti—the personal form of Lord Visnu.

Vrndavana—the village in which Lord Krsna enacts His most intimate pastimes. See also: Goloka Vrndavana

Y

Yogi—one who has achieved, or is striving for, union with the
Supreme.

Yugas—the four great ages of universal time, which occur in repeated cycles of 4,320,000 years.

Guide to Sanskrit Pronunciation

Throughout the centuries, the Sanskrit language has been written in a variety of alphabets. The mode of writing most widely
used throughout India, however, is called devanagari, which
means, literally, the writing used in ‘“‘the cities of the demigods.”’
The devanagari alphabet consists of forty-eight characters, including thirteen vowels and thirty-five consonants. Ancient Sanskrit
grammarians arranged the alphabet according to practical
linguistic principles, and this order has been accepted by all
Western scholars. The system of transliteration used in this book
conforms to a system that scholars in the last fifty years have accepted to indicate the pronunciation of each Sanskrit sound.

The short vowel a is pronounced like the u in but, long 4a like
the a in far, and short i like thei in pin. Long 1 is pronounced as in
pique, short u as in pull, and long u as in rule. The vowel r is pronounced like the ri in rim. The vowel e is pronounced as in they,
ai as in aisle, o as in go, and au as in how. The anusvara (m),
which is a pure nasal, is pronounced like the n in the French word
bon, and visarga (h), which is a strong aspirate, is pronounced as a
final h sound. Thus ah is pronounced like aha, and ih like ihi.

The guttural consonants—k, kh, g, gh, and n—are pronounced from the throat in much the same manner as in English.
K is pronounced as in kite, kh as in Eckhart, g as in give, gh as in
dig hard, and n as in sing. The palatal consonants—e, ch, j, jh,
and il—are pronounced from the palate with the middle of the
tongue. C is pronounced as in chair, ch as in staunch-heart, j as in
joy, jh as in hedgehog, and ni as in canyon. The cerebral consonants—t, th, d, dh, and n—are pronounced with the tip of the
tongue turned up and drawn back against the dome of the palate.

165
166 THE PATH OF PERFECTION

T is pronounced as in tub, th as in light-heart, d as in dove, dh as
in red-hot, and n as in nut. The dental consonants—t, th, d, dh,
and n—are pronounced in the same manner as the cerebrals, but
with the forepart of the tongue against the teeth. The labial consonants—p, ph, b, bh, and m—are pronounced with the lips. P is
pronounced as in pine, ph as in uphill, b as in bird, bh as in rubhard, and m as in mother. The semivowels—y, r, |, and v—are
pronounced as in yes, run, light, and vine respectively. The
sibilants §, s, and s—are pronounced, respectively, as in the German word sprechen and the English words shine and sun. The letter h is pronounced as in home.

 

Index

A

Abhyasena tu kaunteya
verse quoted, 94-95
Abrahma-bhuvanal lokah
verse quoted, 135
Absolute Truth
cognizant, 41, 42
everything comes from, 28-29, 41
Krsnaas, 41-42
living entity contrasted to, 42
See also: God; Krsna, Lord (Supreme
Personality of Godhead);
Reality
Activity
in Krsna consciousness, 1, 6-9, 21, 50,
64-65, 73, 79, 87, 95, 107
living entity must have, 17-18
material, yogiceases, 14-15
material & spiritual, 5, 64-65
pious, 16, 104, 111, 117
positive & negative, 7-8
for self or Supreme, 1
sinful, 35, 105
See also: Work
Adrsta-purvam hrsito ‘smi drstva
verse quoted, 115
Advancement, spiritual
by faith, 71-72
by impersonal meditation, 96
in Krsna consciousness, 71, 79, 103-4,
140, 152
sign of, 35
See also: Godhead, returning to

Age, present: See: Kali-yuga (present Age)

Agni-hotra yajrias (fire sacrifices), 2

Agnir jyotir ahah suklah
verse quoted, 149
Ahaituky apratihata
quoted, 109
verse quoted, 33-34, 108-9
Air & consciousness, analogy of, 101-2
Air India, purchasing ticket on, example
of, 145
Ajo nityah sasvato ‘yam puradno
verse quoted, 32-33, 123
Ajo pi sann avyayatma
quoted, 32
Albert Einstein, 145
Amara Gjnaya guru hafia tara’ ei desa
verse quoted, 36
Ambarisa Maharaja, 20, 60-61
America, United States of
confusion in, 50
defense force of, 49-50
Indian yogi in, 72
President of, example of, 113-14, 147
standard of life in, 16
- yoga societies in, 38
Analogies
air & consciousness, 101-2
astronauts aloft & impersonalists
merged, 126
awaking from sleep & chanting Hare
Krsna, 144
body’s parts & Supreme’s parcels, 1,
110
candle (original) & Krsna, 94
car & body, 56
cataracts & imperfect senses, 29
chariot & body, 19
cloud & mahat-tattva, 140
 

 

168

Analogies (continued)

criminal & fallen living entity, 110-11

darkness & maya, 19, 22-23

doctor & advanced devotee, 35

doctor’s prescription & Vedic
literature, 28

dress & body, 54

elevator & bhakti-yoga, 111-12

father & God, 109, 110

finger of body & servants of Krsna, 6

fire & Krsna consciousness, 79

flame’s energy & Krsna’s energy, 80

frog in well & philosophers, 129

gold (buying) & truth (searching for),
31

hand of body & parts of Supreme, 54

hunger satisfied & self realized, 76, 146

iron in fire & body in Krsna consciousness, 4-5

knowing father & knowing God, 140

ladder & yogasystem, 18

lamp in windless place & transcendentalist, 63

machine’s part & Supreme’s servant,
15

married girl & neophyte in Krsna consciousness, 67

missionary & devotee of Krsna, 78

mother & Vedas, 53

mother serving child & devotee serving Krsna, 108

ocean & spiritual bliss, 10-11

ocean rescue & Krsna consciousness,
144

oil in water & spirit in matter, 4

policeman shooting & universal form,
116

protected patient & surrendered soul,
65

seeing sun & seeing Supreme, 69

Staircase & yogasystem, 111

submissive son & surrendered soul, 66

sun & Krsna, 19, 22, 54, 147

sun rising & God revealing Himself, 31

sun’s reflections & Supersoul’s expansions, 86-87

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Analogies

vulture & sense enjoyer, 56
wind & mind, 8
See also: “compared to” entries under
; headings that have them
Ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis
_ verse quoted, 10
Ananda defined, 9, 29
Anandamaya defined, 9
Anandamayo ‘bhyasat
_ quoted, 9
Anandambudhi-vardhanam pratipadam
quoted, 11
Ananya-cetah satatam
verse quoted, 128
Anarya-justam asvargyam
verse quoted, 7
Anasritah karma-phalam
. verse quoted, 1-2
Andtmanas tu satrutve
verse quoted, 25
Andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham
quoted, 79
Aneka-janma-samsiddhas
verse quoted, 102
Angani yasya sakalendriya-vrttimanti
quoted, 31
Anger, 75
Animals, humans privileged above, 89,
134
Anxiety, 49-50
See also: Fear; Misery
Apani-pado javano grhita
quoted, 30
Apasyat purusam pturnam
verse quoted, 22-23
Aprapya yoga-samsiddhim
verse quoted, 97
Apratistho maha-baho
verse quoted, 99
Arcanam vandanamdasyam
quoted, 44
Arjuna
cited on mind, 8
God realized by, 130
Krsna chastised, 55-56

Index

Arjuna
Krsna inspired, to fight, 6-7
as Krsna’s friend, 148
quoted on deviation from Transcendence, 99
quoted on failure in self-realization, 97
quoted on Krsna dispelling doubt, 99
quoted on universalform, 115
quoted on yogasystem, 8, 91
universal form seen by, 115, 116
_ yogasystem rejected by, 8, 91-92
Aroha-panthaprocess, 130
Aruhya krcchrena param padam tatah
_ verse quoted, 126
Aruruksor muner yogam
verse quoted, 14
Asamsayam maha-baho
verse quoted, 94-95
Asamyatatmana yogo
_ verse quoted, 95
Asanasystem, 14
Asann api klesada asa dehah
quoted, 56
Asatdefined, 56
Aslisya va pada-ratam pinastumam
quoted, 34-35
Association
consciousness according to, l0l- 2
importance of, 103
with Krsna by chanting His names,
151-52
with Krsna’s devotees, 32, 102
Astanga-yoga, 45, 91-92, 98, 111
Astrologers, calculations of, at birth &
death, 149
Astronauts aloft & impersonalists merged,
analogy of, 126
Ataeva maya tare deya samsara-duhkha
verse quoted, 25
Atah sri-krsna-namadi
quoted, 29.
verse quoted, 27, 143
Atha va yoginam eva
verse quoted, 100
Atheism, 145, 146
See also: Impersonalism

169

Atma defined, 18-19
_ See also: Soul
Atmaiva hy atmano bandhur
_ verse quoted, 18
Atma-samstham manah krtva
__ verse quoted, 69
Atmaupamyena sarvatra
verse quoted, 88-89
Atom, Krsna in, 79
Attachments, material, 27
See also:Bodily concept; Desires,
material
Author, the (A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupdada)
in Calcutta bombing (1942), 116
son of, question of, 151
in Vrndavana, always, 128
Authority, spiritual
knowledge from, 43, 53, 130, 145
See also: Spiritual master
Avajananti defined, 110-11
Avaroha-pantha process, 130-31
Avinasi tu tad viddhi
verse quoted, 143
Avyakta defined, 140, 142, 143
Avyaktad vyaktayah sarvah
verse quoted, 138
Avyakta hi gatir duhkham
verse quoted, 96
Avyakto ‘ksara ity uktas
verse quoted, 142
Awaking from sleep & chanting Hare
Krsna, analogy of, 144
‘Ayatih sraddhayopeto
verse quoted, 97
Ayi nanda-tanuja kinkaram
verse quoted, 115, 144

B

Baladeva Vidyabhisana, cited on passing
away & returning, 150
Balasya neha saranam pitarau nrsimha
quoted, 65
170

Bandhaya visayasangi
verse quoted, 22
Bandhur atmatmanas tasya
verse quoted, 25
Beings. See: Living entities
Belly, 75
Benedictions, 16-17
Bengali proverb, cited on test at death, 122
Bhagavaa-gita ,
See also: Bhagavad-gita, cited;
Bhagavad-gita, quotations from
as authority, 145
ever fresh, 60
first instruction of, 55, 97
God’s greatness known via, 118
as inspiration to serve Krsna, 6-7
knowledge by hearing, 140
known by Krsna consciousness, 32
Krsna speaks, 77, 145
material & spiritual natures in, 139
Opportune instruction in, 89
seeing Krsna-via, 80-81
Spiritualsky in, 53
yogain, |
Bhagavad-gita, cited
on big businessman, 15
On eating too much or too little, 59
on Krsna providing for devotees, 5-6
— on mind difficult to control, 8
on serving the senses, 115
on yogasystem, 1
on yogi, highest, 107-8
Bhagavad-gita, quotations from
on Arjuna rejecting yoga system, 8
on Arjuna’s impurities, 7
on astanga-yoga, 45
on birth in good family, 118
on Brahma’s day & night, 136-37, 138
ondemigod worship, 108
on deviation from Transcendence, 99
on devotee never perishing, 81
on devotees knowing paths of passing
away, 150-51
on devotional service on Brahman platform, 87
on eating & sleeping, 51

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Bhagavad-gita, quotations from

on embodied soul, sense enjoyment, &
higher taste, 146

on failure in self-realization, 97

on going to God at death, 121-22

on great souls attaining perfection, 133

on impersonal meditation, 95-96

on knowers of Supreme Brahman passing away, 149

on knowing Krsna’s advent & activities, 106

on knowledge joyfully realized, 76

on Krsna as seed-giving father, 52

on Krsna dispellingdoubt, 99

on Krsna in water, light, sound, &
ability, 80 |

on Krsna revealing knowledge of Himself, 44

on Krsna’s abcde, 52, 142

on Krsna’s impartiality & favoritism,
66

on learned words & lamentation, 55

On living entities as Lord’s parts & parcels, 65

on Lord as all-pervading, in His abode,
& attained by pure devotion, 147

on Lord in heart, 86

on Lord known by devotional service,
44,112

on material world as place of misery,
135

on millenial cosmic manifestations, 85

on mind, control of, 73, 94, 95

on mind, Supersoul, & tranquillity, 26

on mindasfriend or enemy, 18, 25

on mind fixed on Self, 69

_on mystic passing away & returning,

150

on mystic transcendentalist attaining
God’s kingdom, 48 )

on nature, material & transcendental,
139

on offerings acceptable to God, 30

on om, God, & spiritual planets, 124

on one seeing Krsna everywhere never
lost, 81

Index

Bhavavad-gita, quotations from

On passing away, two ways of, 150

on perfect yogi, 88-89

On pious persons determined in devotional service, 104 )

on preacher devotee, 70-71

on remembering Krsna & obtaining
Him, 128.

on renunciation as yoga, 13

on samadhi (trance), 63-64

on self-realization, person established
in, 26

on soul pervading body, 143

on soul’s eternality, 32-33, 123

On spiritual identity, 4

on spiritually advanced person, 35

on temperate habits, 51, 57

On times to pass away from world, 149

on transcendentalist not overcome by
evil, 100

on transcendentalist perfecting consciousness from previous life,
100-101

on transcendentalist’s mind fixed on
Supreme Self, 36, 63

on transcendentally situated person, 146

on universal form, 115

on work & renunciation, 1-2

on yoga & sex, 47

on yoga as detachment from sensual
engagements, 121

on yoga joyfully performed, 9

on yoga system, neophyte & perfectional stages of, 14

on yoga system as impractical &
unendurable, 91

on yoga with determination, 67

on yogi, highest, 107

on yogi, unsuccessful, 100

on yogiattaining yoga, 60

on yogi knowing Supersoul, 84

on yogi practicing to perfection, 102

on yogiseeing Krsna everywhere, 78

on yogi’s greatness, 106

on yogi'shappiness, 77

on yogi's renunciation, 15

171

Bhagavad-gita, quotations from
On yogi's sitting place, 37-38
Bhagavan. See: Krsna, Lord
Bhagavata. See: Srimad-Bhagavatam
Bhajate defined, 107
Bhakti defined, 21, 117
See also: Devotional service, Krsna,
love for
Bhaktih paresanubhavo viraktir anyatra ca
quoted, 145
Bhaktim mayi param krtva
verse quoted, 70
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, quoted on devotee
as liberated, 87
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, A. C.
(the author)
in Calcutta bombing (1942), 116
son of, question of, 151
in Vrndavana always, 128
Bhakti-yozis. See: Devotees
Bhakti-yoga
blissful, 9, 11
**chance”’ destiny not in, 151
compared to elevator, 111-12
completed in this life, 118-19
as descending process, 43
easy for everyone, 93-94
in essence, 2
God as goal of, 117-18
in Krsna consciousness movement, 48
Krsna obtained via, 129
perfection by, 106-7, 111
practical for present Age, 98
‘process of, 6, 44-45
as pure devotion, 112, 113
as recreation, 9
as servitor, served, & service, 118
spiritual master in, 118
success in, 68-69
temple sacred in, 38
See also: Devotional service, Krsna
consciousness
Bkakti-yogena manasi
verse quoted, 22-23
Bhaktya mam abhijanati
verse quoted, 44, 112
172

Bhauma Vrndavana. See: Vrndavana (on
Earth)
Bhavitd na ca me tasmad
verse quoted, 70-71
Bhayam dvitiyabhinivesatah syad
quoted, 46
Bhramayan sarva-bhitani
verse quoted, 86
Bhruvor madhye pranam avesya sampak
verse quoted, 121-22
Bhita-gramah sa evayam
verse quoted, 138
Bible, quoted on body, 101
Bilvamangala Thakura, 118-19
Birth
horoscope at, 149
material or spiritual, 106
in rich family, 118
See also: Birth & death, repeated;
Transmigration
Birth & death, repeated
on highest to lowest planet, 135-36
knowing Krsna stops, 54
liberation from, 136 }
soul not subject to, 123.
See also: Bondage, material;
Transmigration
Bodily concept of life, 35, S5S—S6
See also: Attachments, material; Body,
material; Desires, material; Illusion; Maya
‘Body, material
as bad bargain, 54
change(s) of, 136, 140
compared to car, 56
compared to chariot, 19
compared to dress, 54
complete for spiritual realization, 119
consciousness develops, 101-2
control of, 50
death of, 101
demands of, 59
fitness for, 51, 56-57, 98
as Krsna’s energy, 82, 83
liberation on leaving, 148-49
living entity not, 97, 143
misery due to, 54, 55, 56

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Body, material
parts of, analogy of, 1, 110
preparing, for planetary transfer, 123
as pushing machine, 75
soul develops, 51-52
as soul's disease, 54
soul sustains, 124
spirit in, 49, 139, 143
Spiritualization of, 4-5
temporary, 49, 56, 143
in vulture analogy, 56
See also: Bodily concept; Senses
Body, spiritual
development of, 4-5
getting one like God’s, 123-24
See also: Soul
Bondage, material
by mind on sense objects, 21-22
See also: Birth & death, repeated; Illusion; Maya; Transmigration
Brahma, Lord
day & night of, 137, 138
Krsna instructed, 41
lifetime of, 85-86, 137-38
planet of (Brahmaloka), 136, 137-38
quoted on Durga, 116-17
Brahma-bhitah prasannatma
quoted, 37
verse quoted, 146
Brahmacarya (celibate life) , 46
See also: Detachment; Renunciation;
Sannyasis
Brahmajyoti (Brahman effulgence)
impersonalists in, 2, 125, 126
See also: Merging with the Supreme;
Nirvana; Void, the
Brahmaloka, 136, 137-38
Brahman, impersonal. See: Brahmajyoti;
Merging with the Supreme
Brahman, Supreme
everything comes from, 41
knowers of, passing from world,
149-50
realization of, 146
See also: God; Krsna, Lord (Supreme
Personality of Godhead)
Brahmana, birth in family of, 118

 

Index

Brahman platform, 87-88
See also: Self-realization
Brahma-samhita, quotations from
on devotees seeing God by love,
29-30, 83-84
on Durga, 116-117
on Govinda’s blissful realm, 10
on Krsna in atom, 79
on Krsnaloka, 127
on Lord in His abode & all- “pervading,
53-54
on Lord's form as eternity, bliss, &
knowledge, 28, 29
on Lord's senses, 30-31
on Maha-Visnu as Govinda’'s plenary
portion, 84-85
on yogis & jnanis approaching Lord's
lotus feet, 130-31

Brhan-naradiya Purana, quoted on chant
ing Lord’s names in Kali-yuga,
38-39
British, Gandhi drove, from India, 46-47
Buddhists, 117, 145
Businessman, big, 15-16
See also: Materialists

C

Caitanya-caritamrta, quotations from
On instructing everyone on Krsna, 36
on living entity in maya, 25
Caitanya Mahaprabhu
chanting Hare Krsna delivered by, 8,
76, 112, 113, 152
cited on pure devotional attitude, 3-4
desires devotional service, 112-13
vift of, to this Age, 39, 103, 111-12
as incarnation of God, 112, 152
mission of, 69
pure prayer of, 144, 148
quoted on chanting Lord’s name,
93-94, 151-52
quoted on instructing everyone on
Krsna, 36
quoted on ocean of bliss, 10, 11

quoted on pure devotional attitude, 2,

112-13

173

Caitanya Mahaprabhu
quoted on pure love for Krsna, 34-35
quoted on serving Krsna again, 115,
144
Raghunatha dasa’s prasdda pastime
with, 57-59
Rupa & Sanatana under, 74
Rupa Gosvami quoted on, 112
Calcutta (1942), bombing of, 116
Caricalam hi manah krsna
verse quoted, 94
Candle (original) & Krsna, analogy of, 94
Candy, tasting, example of, 10
Car & body, analogy of, 56
Cat, devoteesees Krsnain, 79
Cataracts & imperfect senses, analogy of,
29
Causal Ocean, 85, 137
Celibacy
determination by, 46-47, 67
Seealso: Detachment, Renunciation,
Sannyasis
Ceto-darpana-marjanam
quoted, 145
Chance, devotee’s destiny not left to,
149-5]
Chandogya Upanisad, cited on passing
away & returning, 150
Chanting (Hare Krsna)
Caitanya delivered, 8, 76, 112, 113,
152
Caitanya quoted on, 93-94, 151-52
ever fresh, 60
fixes mind on Krsna, 73,94
ignorance removed by, 144
in Kali-yuga, 38-39, 76, 93-94, 111-12
knowledge by, 145
Krsna consciousness by, 151
Krsna’s association by, 129, 151-52
liberation by, 119
meaning of, 113
om included in, 124
perfection by, 76, 119
pleasure from, 11
purifying power of, 104
as recreation, 8-9
as safety, 152
174

Chanting (Hare Krsna) (continued)
Sinning after, 105
See also: Hare Krsna mantra
Chariot & body, analogy of, 19
Cheaters & cheated, 47, 72-73, 96
Cheating in ‘‘Krsna consciousness,’’ 105
Child
at kirtana, 19, 93 ,
mother telling, to sit still, example of, 7
restless, example of, 64
seeing shoe of, example of, 83
sex for begetting, 47
Christ, Jesus, 35, 70, 117
Christians, 101, 117-18
Cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vrksa
verse quoted, 127
Citdefined, 29
City, the, 38
Civilization, modern, 135
See also: Kali-yuga (present Age);
Society, human
Cloud & mahat-tattva, analogy of, 140
Comparisons. See: Analogies
Concentration. See: Meditation
Conditioned souls
on bodily platform, 88
contaminated desire of, 37
devotee compassionate to, 70
fear in, 46
Gosvamis delivered, 82
in illusion, 23-24, 35
mind of, 18-19, 21-22
in modes of nature, 99
promoted to perfection, 117
Puranas for, 27
See also: Human life; Living entities;
Materialists, Nondevotees
Confession, sinning after, 105
Consciousness
divinization of, 100-103
sleeping vs. spiritual, 144
See also: Knowledge; Krsna consciousness; Soul; Spirit
Contamination, material, 103-5
See also: Attachments, material;
Desires, material; Sin

THE PATH OF PERFECTION Index

Cosmic manifestation. See: Creation, the;
Material world; Nature, material;
Universe (s)

Cows, surabhi, 127

Creation, the

complete arrangement of, 119

material vs. spiritual, 139

See also: Material world; Nature, material, Universe(s)

Criminal & fallen living entity, analogy of,
110-11

Desire
See also: Love
Desires, material
demigod worship due to, 108
transcendentalist to reject, 36, 37
yogi free of, 16, 60, 61
See also: Attachments, material; Bodily
concept; Lust; Sex life
Desire trees, 127
Detachment
from material enjoyment, 145-46
of yogifrom sense activity, 121, 122
D See also: Renunciation
Determination
by celibacy, 46-47, 67
in Krsna consciousness, 67-68, 68-69,
72, 104 ,
sparrow’sexample of, 68
Devotee(s) of Krsna (bhaktas; bhaktiyogis; Vaisnavas)
associating with, 32, 102
‘*chance”’ destiny not for, 149-51
classes of, 71-72
compared to missionary, 78
compassionate to conditioned souls, 70
‘““conquer’’ Krsna by hearing of Him,
129, 130
demand nothing from Krsna, 109
desire to serve Krsna, 4, 114, 148
duality doesn’t affect, 26
higher planets disinterest, 122-23, 124
Krsna provides for, 5-6
Krsna reveals Himself to, 143
Krsna’s relationship with, 83-84
liberation for, 87-88, 149
loves Krsna, 83-84, 116
merciful, 70
modes of nature surpassed by, 87
never perishes, 81
paths of passing away known to, 151
See also: specific demigods as preachers, 70-71, 72, 78
Desire pure devotees, 2-3, 3-4, 35, 134, 148,
Krsna fulfills, 131 151
to merge with God, 3 respectful, 116
polluted vs. purified, 37 see God by love, 29-30, 83-84
of pure devotee, 2-3, 3-4 sees Krsna in everything, 78-79, 82-83

 

Dancing, Krsna conscious, 8-9
Danger, 152
Daridra-narayana, 18
Darkness
maya compared to, 19, 22-23
passing away in, 150
See also: Ignorance
Death
body after, 101
going to Krsna at, 81, 128
on higher planets, 122-23
horoscope at, 149
Scientistscan'tstop, 128
soul not subject to, 123
time of, destinies at, 149-51
time of, test at, 121-22
unavoidable, 138
witness to, 143
See also: Birth & death, repeated;
Transmigration
Deerskin yoga-dsana, 46
Demigods
Krsna bewilders, 42
universal form feared by, 115
worship to, 108

175

Devotee(s) of Krsna
serves the Lord, 2, 3, 43
in Society of Krsna consciousness, 107
sympathetic to suffering, 78
thinks of Krsna always, 128
as topmost yogi, 78, 87
in Vrndavana always, | 1
yogi less compassionate than, 69-70
Devotional service to Krsna
Ambarisa engaged in, 60-61
as best service, 69
Caitanya desires, 112-13
detachment by, 145-46
devotee desires, 148
forgetting vs. requesting, 113-14
Lord known by, 27, 31-32, 33, 34, 44,
131, 112, 143, 146, 147
nature’s modes surpassed by, 87
preaching as best type of, 72
pure devotional service, 2, 3-4, 129,
146, 147, 148
in Society of Krsna consciousness, 107
unmotivated & uninterrupted, 108-9
vs. worship, 108
See also: Bhakti-yoga; Krsna, love for;
Krsna consciousness
Dharma defined, 108
Dhira defined, 75
Dhruva Maharaja, 16-17
Dhimo ratris tatha krsnah
verse quoted, 150
Dhydana-yoga, 124
Dik-kalady-anavacchinne
verse quoted, 88
Disciple & spiritual master, 118-19
Disease
by eating wrongly, 50-51
the material, 49, 54, 113-14
Diseased man, doctor restricting, example
of, 146
Doctor
advanced devotee compared to, 35
restricting diseased man, example of,
146
Doctor’s prescription & Vedic literature,
analogy of, 28
 

 

176

Dress & body, analogy of, 54
Duality, material
devotee unaffected by, 26
freedom from, 104
See also: Bodily concept
Duality, spiritual, 36
Durasaya ye bahir-artha-maninah
quoted, 136
Durga, 116-17
Durvasa Muni, 20
Dvaita-vada concept, 36
Dvapara-yuga, 93, 137

E

Earth planet
Yand & water on, 139
living entities on, 136
as middle planet, 135
Vrndavana on, 117, 128, 134
See also: Material world
Eating
voracious vs. temperate, 50-51, 57, 59
See also: Meat-eating; Prasada
Eightfold path. See: Astanga-yoga
Einstein, Albert, 145
Ekaki yata-cittatma
verse quoted, 36
Ekamsena sthito jagat
quoted, 139
Ekaya yaty anavrttim
verse quoted, 150
Eko bahiinam yo vidadhati kaman
quoted, 66, 109
Eko ‘pi san bahudha yo 'vabhati
quoted, 88
Elements, material
of body at death, 101
See also: Matter; Nature, material
Elevator & bhakti-yoga, analogy of, 111-12
Empiricists. See: Philosophers; Scholars;
Scientists
Energy of Krsna. See: Krsna, energy of
Enjoyment
living entities want, 125-26, 145

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Enjoyment
material, detachment from, 145-46
power of, limited, 15
of sex, 47
of soul & Supersoul, 65
See also: Happiness, Peace; Pleasure;
Satisfaction; Sense gratification
Etad dhi durlabhataram
verse quoted, 100
Etadrsi tava krpa bhagavan mamapi
verse quoted, 151-52
Etan me samsayam krsna
verse quoted, 99
Etan vegan yo visaheta dhirah
verse quoted, 75
Etasyaham na pasyami
verse quoted, 8, 91
Eternal life
attainment of, 136
happiness in, 97
reality as, 141
Evolution, 89
Existence. See: Life

F

Faith, 71-72, 145
Fat, practicing yoga to reduce, 50, 98
Father
God compared to, 109, 110
in knowledge example, 53
Fear, 46
See also: Anxiety; Misery
Finger of body & servants of Krsna,
analogy of, 6
Fire, iron in, & body in Krsna consciousness, analogy of, 4-5
Fire & Krsna consciousness, analogy of,
79

Fire sacrifices, 2

Flame’s energy & Krsna’s energy, analogy
of, 80

Food offered to Krsna. See: Prasada

Ford, Mr., 113

Forest, 38

Index

Fortune, goddesses of, 127
Freedom

from duality, 104

by Krsna consciousness, 105

from material existence, 54

from misery, 64

See also: Independence; Liberation
Frog in well & philosophers, analogy of,

129

Fruitive activities, 15-18
See also: Pious activity

Fruitive workers, 150
See also: Materialists

G

Gambling, 104-5
Gandhi, Mahatma, 46-47, 114
Ganges River, 38
Garbhodakasayi Visnu, 86
Garuda, 68
Genitals, 75
Ghranam ca tat-pada-saroja-saurabhe
verse quoted, 60-61
Goat sacrifice, 27-28
God
as adhoksaja, 34
attaining to, after death, 121-22

beyond experimental knowledge, 34,

53, 139-40
as bhakti-yoga’s goal, 117-18
body of, 123
compared to father, 109, 110
complete creation by, 119

devotional service reveals, 27, 31-32,

33, 34, 44, 131
Dhruva saw, 16, 17
eats, 30-31
eternal, 32, 33
fallen one’s pain felt by, 110
form(s) of, 28-29, 147-48
great, 117-18
independent, 41, 42
kingdom of. See: Kingdom of God
knows everything, 42

177

God
living entities sons of, 110
living entity's needs supplied by, 109
love for. See: Love for God
misunderstood by mental speculation,
people uninterested in, 13
as person, 32, 147
plus or minus Him, 121
rascals pose aS, 31, 72-73, 116
seen by Krsna consciousness, 31-32,

33

seen by personalists, 124
seen by purified senses, 29-30, 31
seen by qualifying ourselves, 84
seen by submissive servant, 131
senses of, 30-31
as supreme living entity, 33, 36
thinking oneself to be, 113-14
as yoga’s goal, 18, 36
See also: Absolute Truth; Krsna, Lord
(Supreme Personality of Godhead); Supersoul
Go-dasa defined, 74
Goddesses of fortune, 127
Godhead, returning to
by Krsna consciousness, 102
by purification, 106
qualification for, 103
See also: Advancement, spiritual;
Kingdom of God
**God helps those who help themselves,’
6, 69
God realization

9

by hearing from realized source, 129, 130

Satisfaction of, 17, 146
stages of, 117-18
as unconditional, 33
See also: Krsna consciousness
Gold, buying, searching for truth compared to, 31
Goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhitah
quoted, 53, 54
verse quoted, 10
Goloka Vrndavana, 11, 53, 106, 110, 117,
134, 136
 

178

Goloka Vrndavana (continued)
See also: Krsna, abode of, Krsnaloka
Goodness, mode of
forestin, 38
Puranas for men in, 27, 28
Gopala Bhatta Gosvami, 82
Gopas (Krsna’s friends), 117
Gopi-bhava-rasamrtabdhi-lahariquoted, 82
verse quoted, 81-82
Gopis (Krsna’s girl friends), 8, 82
Gosvamidefined, 74
Gosvamis, the six, 59, 81-82
Government
in criminal-fallen-living-entity
analogy, 110-11
See also: Civilization; Society, human
Govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
quoted, 85
Gunas defined, 34
See also: Modes of nature
Guru. See: Spiritual master.
Guru Maharaja (of author), quoted on
seeingGod, 131

H
Hand of body & parts of Supreme, analogy
of, 54
Happiness

by bhakti-yoga, 9
in eternal life, 97
by Krsna consciousness, 66, 152
transcendental, 64
of yogi, 77
See also: Enjoyment; Peace; Pleasure;
Satisfaction; Sense gratification
Hare defined, 113, 144
Hare Krsna mantra, 72, 129, 144, 152
See also: Chanting (Hare Krsna)
Hare Krsna movement. See: Krsna consciousness movement
Harer nama harer nama
verse quoted, 38-39, 93-94
Hate, advanced devotee free of, 35

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Health, good, 56-57, 59
Hearing
God realization by, 129, 130
of Hare Krsna, 119, 144
knowledge by, 53, 130, 140
of Krsna’s name, 104
Heart, Lord in, 86-87, 88-89
Hindi verse, quoted on Kali-yuga people,
72
Hindus, 101
Hiranyakasipu, 49
Horoscope at birth & death, 149
Householders, sex for, 47
Hrsikena hrsikesaquoted, 21
Human life
animal life vs., 89, 134
duty of, 136
goat promoted to, by sacrifice, 28
for Krsna consciousness, 152
opportunity of, 89, 134
purpose of, 141
reason wasted in, 134
See also: Conditioned souls; Life;
Society, human
Hunger satisfied & self realized, analogy
of, 76, 146

I

Icchanurtipam api yasya ca cestate sa
verse quoted, 116-17
Identity, 55, 65, 97-98, 143
See also: Self-realization; Soul
Ignorance
chanting Hare Krsna removes, 144
God’s form not perceived in, 28
misery not perceived in, 133-34
Puranas for men in, 27
in yugas, 137
See also: Bodily concept; Darkness; Illusion; Maya
Tha haite sarva siddhi haibe tomara
quoted, 76
Iksate yoga-yuktatma
verse quoted, 78

 

Index

Illusion
conditioned soul in, 23-24, 35
vs. self-realization, 98-99
of thinking oneself God, 113-14
See also: Bodily concept; Ignorance;
Maya
Impersonalism, 145, 146, 148
See also: Atheism, Materialism; Merging with the Supreme; Nirvana;
Void, the
Impersonalists
in brahmajyoti, 125, 126
Brahman goal of, 2
desire of, 4
fall back to material world, 126
God formless to, 28-29
imagine Visnu form, 124
universal form interests, 115, 116
See also: Buddhists; Materialists;
Voidists
Incarnation of Godhead
Caitanya as, 112, 152
See also: Krsna, advent of
Independence
of Lord & living entities, 19
See also: Freedom, Liberation
India ,
astrologers in, 149
disposing of dead body in, 101
Gandhi drove British from, 46-47
Gandhi killed in, 114
sacred places in, 38
standard of life in, 16
yogis in, 38, 46, 72
Indriyani parany ahur
quoted, 20-21
Induction, knowledge by, 43
Initiation, spiritual
in Society for Krsna consciousness,
104-5
See also: Advancement, spiritual
Intelligence
soul above, 21
See also: Consciousness, Knowledge
International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON). See: Krsna
consciousness movement

179

Intoxication, 104-5, 135

[svarah paramah krsnah
quoted, 28, 29, 123

ISvarah sarva-bhitanam
verse quoted, 86

J

Jagannatha-prasdda, 58, 59
Jagannatha Puri, 57, 58
Janmady asya yatah
quoted, 28, 41, 43
Janmady asya yato 'nvayad
verse quoted, 41-42
Janma karma ca me divyam
verse quoted, 106
Jesus Christ, 35, 70, 117
Jijfidsur api yogasya
verse quoted, 101
Jitatmanah prasantasya
verse quoted, 26
Jiva Gosvami, 82
Jiidna-vijfiana-trptatma
verse quoted, 26
Jridna-yoga, 41, 43, 98, 111, 122
Jiidne prayasam udapasya namanta eva
verse quoted, 129
Janis, 3, 43, 131
See also: Philosophers

K

Kaccin nobhaya-vibhrastas
verse quoted, 99
Kadaham aikantika-nitya-kinkarah
quoted, 66
Kalau nasty eva nasty eva
verse quoted, 38-39, 93-94
Kali, goddess, goat sacrifice to, 27-28
Kali-yuga (present Age)
bhakti-yoga for, 98
chanting Lord’s names in, 38-39, 76,
93-94, 104, 111-12
characteristics & duration of, 137
180

Kali-yuga (continued)
cheaters & cheated in, 72-73
life's aim forgotten in, 136
life span in, 92,93
yoga in, 1, 92-94
Kalki-avatara, 137
Kalpa defined, 137
Kalpa-ksaye punas tani, 85
Kalpa-vrksa trees, 127
Kamais tais tair hrta-jnanah
verse quoted, 108
Kamam ca dasye na tu kama-kamyaya
verse quoted, 60-61
Kapiladeva, Lord, 48
Karau harer mandira-marjanadisu
verse quoted, 60-61
Karma. See: Activity, Transmigration,
Work
Karma-yoga, \, 111
Karmibhyas cadhiko yogi
verse quoted, 106
Katha Upanisad, quoted on chief eternal of
all eternals, 69
Kaunteya pratijanihi
quoted, 81
Kennedy, President J.F., 49, 114
Kingdom of God
description of, 52
entering into, 112
knowledge of, 53
pure, 103
returning to. See: Godhead, returning
to
transcendentalist attains, 48
yogireaches, 53
See also: Goloka Vrndavana; Krsna,
abode of; Krsnaloka; Spiritual
world
Kirtana, children at, 79, 93
Kirtanamdefined, 44
Kleso ‘dhikatarastesam
quoted, 64
verse quoted, 96
Knowing father & knowing God, analogy
of, 140
Knowledge
academic, Krsna not known by, 32, 33

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Knowledge
ascending & descending processes of,
43, 130-31
by chanting Hare Krsna, 145
experimental, God beyond, 34, 53,
139-40
by hearing from authority, 53, 130, 140
‘*king’* of, 76
senses for gathering, 143-44
transcendental, 33, 53
ultimate, 43
See also: Absolute Truth; Consciousness; Philosophy; Selfrealization
Krishna. See: Krsna
Krpaya tava pada-pankajaverse quoted, 115, 144
Krsna, Lord (Supreme Personality of
Godhead)
abode of, 142, 147
absolute nature of, 151-52
as Absolute Truth, 41-42
activities of, 8
advent of, 128, 134
as Ajita, 129
all-pervading & aloof, 53-54, 79, 147
all-powerful, 151
Arjuna chastised by, 55-56
Arjuna friend of, 148
Arjuna inspired to fight by, 6-7
Arjuna realized God via, 130
associating with, by chanting His
names, 151-52
in atom, 79
beyond sense perception, 27, 29,
143-144 |
Bhagavad-gita spoken by, 77, 145
blissful, 9, 10
as cause of all causes, 41
cited
On eating too much or too little, 59
on Krsna providing for devotees,
5-6
on mind, 19
on miserable material world, 134
on nature, material & spiritual,
140-41

 

Index

Krsna, Lord
cited
ontimes to leave body, 149
on transcendental path, 98
on yogasystem, 1
on yogi, highest, 107-8
See also: Bhagavad-gita, cited,
Bhagavad-gita, quotations
from; Krsna, quoted
compared to original candle, 94
compared tosun, 19, 22, 54, 147
as ‘‘conquered’’ by pure devotion, 129
ascontroller, 113
as creator, maintainer, annihilator,
85-86
dances, 8, 9
demand nothing from, 109
demigods bewildered by, 42
desire fulfilled by, 131
desire to serve, 37
devotees of. See: Devotees
devotional service to. See: Bhakti-yoga;
Devotional service
doubt dispelled by, 99
Durga directed by, 117
energy of
creation, maintenance, & annihilation by, 85-86
Durga (Maya) as, 116-17
everything as, 82-83
external, 23
Hareas, 113
as Krsna, 80
material vs. spiritual, 5
three types of, 80
envies no one, 66
eternal associates of, 117
exists everywhere, 11, 78-84
faith in, 72, 145
as father of all, 52, 66
food offered to. See: Prasada
forgetting Him, 55, 78, 79
form(s) of, 28, 29, 115-16
friends of, 117
gopis’ love for, 82
as Govinda, 117, 127
hankering after, 131

181

Krsna, Lord

hearing name of, 104
in heart of all, 86-87, 88-89
as HrsikeSa, 21 ©
impartial but favors devotees, 66
impersonaleffulgence of, 125, 126
impersonal sound of, 124
inconceivable, 131
instructing everyone on, 36
as Jagadisa, 113
as Kalki-avatara, 137
kingdom of. See: Kingdom of
God
knowledge about, birth-death cycle
ended by, 54, 106
known by devotional service, 27,
44
known by His grace, 32
known by Krsna consciousness,
128-29, 131, 134, 135
in light of sun & moon, 80-81
living entities part of, 1, 25, 54, 65,
78-79, 82-83, 110
living entities sons of, 66
love for
Caitanya gives, 112
in devotee, 83-84
in gopis, 82
as pure love, 108
universal love by, 83
See also: Devotional service; Love
for God
Maya directed by, 117

- meditation on, 41-42, 47-48, 50,

63-64, 88, 95, 96

mind fixed on, 19-20, 36-37, 50, 54,
69, 73, 94, 96, 128

name(s) of, 104, 113, 144, 151-52

as Nanda’s son, 115, 144

as original form of God, 45, 94

pastimes of, 8, 117

pictures of, 10

planet of. See: Goloka Vrndavana,
Krsnaloka

as pleasure reservoir, 123-24, 127

praying to, 117

protection by, 6, 65-66, 66-67
182

Krsna, Lord (continued)

quoted
on Arjuna’s impurities, 7
on Brahmaloka & birth-death cycle,
135-36 |
on devotee never perishing, 81
On impersonal meditation, 95-96
on knowledge joyfully realized, 76
on Krsna as seed-giving father, 52
on Krsna in water, light, sound, &
ability, 80
on Krsna revealing knowledge of
Himself, 44
on Krsna’s abode, 142
on Krsna’s impartiality & favoritism, 66
on learned words & lamentation, 55
on ‘‘Me,”’ 77
on meditation’s goal, 48
on mind, controlof, 95
on samadhi (trance), 63-64
on transcendentalist not overcome
byevil, 100 —
on transcendentalist perfecting consciousness from previous
life, 100-101
on work & renunciation, 1-2
on yoga &sex, 47
on yogi, unsuccessful, 100
on yogi's greatness, 106, 107
See also: Bhagavaa-gita, cited,
Bhagavaa-gitd, quotations
from; Krsna, cited
remembering Him, 81, 128, 151
respect to, 116
“rivals” of, 147
sages bewildered by, 42
scholars misunderstanding, 32
seen by His grace, 32
seen everywhere, 78-84
service to. See: Bhakti-yoga; Devotional
service
Spiritual, 144
as Supersoul, 65
surrender to, 65-66
as Syimasundara, 115, 116
temple of, 38

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Krsna, Lord
thinking of, at death, 151
universal form of, 115-16
universe controlled by, 113
as Visnu’s origin, 45, 53, 84-85, 86, 94
in Vrndavana, 128
Vyasa saw, 23
in water’s taste, 80-81
within & without, 147
work for satisfying, 5
as yoga's objective, 50
yoga system described by, 45
yogisees, everywhere, 78, 79-80
See also: God

Krsna bhuli’ sei jiva—anadi-bahirmukha

verse quoted, 25.

Krsna consciousness

action in, 1, 6-9, 21, 64-65, 73, 79, 87,
95,107

advancement in, 71, 79, 103-4, 140,
152

basis of, 82

Bhagavad-gitaknown by, 32

body spiritualized by, 4-5

by chanting Hare Krsna, 151

child in, 79

compared to fire, 79

compared to ocean rescue, 144

determination in, 67-68, 68-69, 72,
104

for direct contact to Supreme, 103-4,
111-12

faith in, 71-72

fearlessness by, 46

freedom by, 105

going to Godhead by, 102

happiness by, 66, 152

importance of, 136

instruments for, 119

knowingly or unknowingly partaken,
719

Krsna obtained via, 128-29, 131, 134,
135

liberation by, 2, 22

as love for Krsna, 83

love impossible without, 83

material motive absent in, 109

Index

Krsna consciousness
material world transcended by, 106
maya dispelled by, 22
mind in, 22, 63, 69, 96
misery ended by, 134, 135
peace by, 50
perfection of, 61, 108, 117, 135
persons in. See: Devotees
philosophy of, 22
pious acts precede, 104
pleasure in, 8-11
preachingof, 72, 78
process of, 36, 143
as purification, 21
recreation in, 8-9
relief by, 144
revival of, 110
satisfaction by, 146
seeing God by, 31-32, 33
as seeing Krsna everywhere, 81
self-realization by, 76
self-realization surpassed by, 83
vs. sense gratification, 18
senses spiritualized by, 21
sex life inferior to, 146
sinning in name of, 105
spiritual world via, 127, 128

as yoga’s perfection, 18, 24, 54, 88, 96,107

See also: Bhakti; Devotional service;
Yoga
Krsna consciousness movement
activities in, 95
of bhakti-yogis, 48
devotees in, 107
effect of entering, 103-4
everyone welcomed in, 35-36, 103
initiation into, 104-5
meditation in, 48
members of, as preachers, 69
purpose of, 5, 19, 101,114
rules & regulations of, 104-5
Krsnaloka, 53, 127
See also: Goloka Vrndavana; Krsna,
abode of
Krsna-prasada. See: Prasada
Krsnas tu bhagavan svayam
quoted, 45

183

Krsna stirya-sama maya haya andhakara

quoted, 22

Krta-punya-punjah

quoted, 117

Ksirodakasayi Visnu, 86

See also: Supersoul

Kusa grass, 37
Kutas tva kasmalam idam

verse quoted, 7

L

Ladder & yoga system, analogy of,

18

Laksmi-sahasra-Sata-sambhrama
verse quoted, 127

Lamp in windless place & transcenden
talist, analogy of, 63

Liberated souls, 9, 147-48

See also: Devotees, pure devotees,
Mahatma; Spiritual master

Liberation

by bhakti-yoga, 94

from birth-death cycle, 136

at body’s demise, 148-49

on Brahman platform, 87-88

by chanting Hare Krsna, 119

of devotee, 149

five kinds of, 147-48

by Krsna consciousness, 2, 22

love for Krsna surpasses, 83

pure devoteeuninterested in, 148

-yogis demand, 113

See also: Freedom, Independence;
Purification; Salvation

Life

aim of, forgotten in this Age, 136
of Brahma, 85-86, 137-38
perfection of, 121-22

span of, in higher planets, 122-23, 136,

138
span of, in yugas, 92, 93
species of, 52, 55, 89
See also: Human life; Living entities;
Material life; Soul; Spiritual life
Life-force. See: Consciousness; Soul
184

Light
passing away in, 150
in spiritual sky, 142
See also: Brahmajyoti; Sun
Living entities
Absolute Truth vs., 42
active, 17-18, 64
in anxiety, 49
body not, 97, 143
as created & destroyed continually,
138
on Earth, 136
enjoyment wanted by, 125-26, 145
eternal, 32-33
fallen, compared to criminal, 110-11
God supplies needs of, 109
Krsna father of, 52
Krsna protects, 66-67
as Krsna’s son, 66, 110
Lord in heart of, 86-87, 89
as Lord’s parts & parcels, 1, 25, 54, 65,
78-79, 82-83, 110
Lord supreme among, 33, 36, 69
as marginal energy, 80
in maya, 25
in modes of nature, 23
on other planets, 136
in spiritual sky, 141, 147
as traveler, 135
water needed by, 80-81
See also: Conditioned souls, Consciousness; Human life; Life;
Soul; Spirit
Love
service due to, 108
universal, 83
for universal form impossible, 115-16
See also: Desire
Love for God
devotees see God by, 29-30
devotional service based on, 107
as real religion, 34, 109
unconditional, 34-35
as yoga's perfection, 109
See also: Devotional service; Krsna,
love for

 

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Lust
demigod worship due to, 108
See also: Desires, material; Sex life

M

Machine’s part & Supreme’s servant,
analogy of, 15
Maha-mantra. See: Chanting (Hare
Krsna); Hare Krsna mantra
Maharaja Nanda, 115, 144
Mahatma (great soul), 134
Mahatma Gandhi, 46-47, 114, 134
Mahat-tattva defined, 140
Maha-Visnu, 85-86
Mamaivamso jiva-loke
quoted, 65
Mama janmani janmanisvare
quoted, 113
verse quoted, 2, 112
Mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena
verse quoted, 87
Mam upetya punarjanma
verse quoted, 133
Mamupetya tu kaunteya
verse quoted, 135
Mana eva manusyanam
verse quoted, 22
Manah samyamya mac-citto
verse quoted, 45
Manasaivendriya-gramam
verse quoted, 67
Mankind. See: Human life; Society,
human
Mantras
for goat sacrifice, 28
money in exchange for, 47, 72
‘*private,’’ 72
See also: Chanting (Hare Krsna); Hare
Krsna mantra
Markandeya Purdna
Cited on goat sacrifice to goddess Kali,
27
for ignorance mode, 27

Index

Married girl & neophyte in Krsna consciousness, analogy of, 67
Material body. See: Body, material
Material desires. See: Desires, material
Materialists
anxiety of, 49-50
demands of, 113
life’s aim forgotten by, 136
See also: Conditioned souls; Impersonalists, Nondevotees; Philosophers; Scientists, material
Material life
disentanglement from, 24
entanglement in, 21-22
freedom from, 54
mind controls us in, 74
miseries of, 125, 127-28
yoga ends, 50
See also: Bondage, material, Material
world; Maya; Nature, material;
Universe(s)
Material world
conditioned souls in, 35
covering of, 139
as creation for criminals, 110
dangerous, 152
dark, 142
flux in, 138
friends & enemies in, 35
impersonalists fall back to, 126
Krsna consciousness frees one from, 106
for Lord’s ‘‘rivals,’* 147
as material energy, 80
miseries in, 133, 134-35
nonpermanent nature of, 49
pleasure in, 127
sense gratification basis of, 35
service in, 114
Spiritualization of, 5
Spiritual world vs., 4, 52-53, 127,
139-43, 147
times to pass away from, 149-51
yogis never returning to, 133
See also: Creation, the; Earth planet;
Material life, Maya; Nature, material; Universe(s)

185

Matter, 4, 5
See also: Elements, material; Material
world, Nature, material
Maya, 116-17
Maya
compared to darkness, 19, 22-23
Krsna consciousness dispels, 22
living entity in, 25
people in, 72
service to, 114
soul covered by, 24
war against, 98-99
See also: Illusion, Material world,
Modes of nature; Nature,
material
Mayan ca tad-apasrayam
quoted, 22-23
Mayavada philosophy, 148
See also: Impersonalism
Mayavadis. See: Impersonalists
Meat-eating, 27-28, 50, 104-5
Meditation
asleep & awake, 45-46
**fifteen-minute,’’ 75-76
on Krsna, 41-42, 47-48, 50, 63-64, 88,
95, 96
as negating nonsense, 7
perfection of, 8
on Supreme Self, 36-37
on Visnu, 45, 47-48, 124
on void, 95-96
of yogion Supersoul, 84, 86, 87
See also: Praying, Trance, Yoga
Men, all, are mortal, example of, 43
Mental speculation
God not known by, 43, 44, 145, 147
See also: Impersonalism
Merging with the Supreme, 3, 148
See also: Brahmajyoti; Impersonalism,
Nirvana; Void, the
Metaphysics. See: Philosophy; Soul; Spiritual world
Mind
as binder or liberator, 22
cleaning of, 145
compared to chariotdriver, 19
 

 

186

Mind (continued)
of conditioned soul, 18-19, 21-22
control of , 8, 36, 37, 50, 73, 74, 95, 96
duality in, 104
equilibrium for, 60
fixed on Krsna, 19-20, 22, 36-37, 50,
54, 63, 69, 73, 94, 96, 128
fixed on Supreme Self, 36-37, 64
as friend or enemy, 18-19, 25
in pure state, 64, 65
senses subordinate to, 21, 74, 144
speed of, 131
Supersoul controlling, 26
yoga to control, 19-20, 23, 25, 60,
63-64, 73, 74, 75, 95
See also: Meditation
Misery - |
body causes, 54, 55, 56
of fallen, Lord feels, 110
four kinds of, 122-23
freedom from, 64
in ignorance not perceived, 133-34
intoxication doesn’tsolve, 135
Krsna consciousness ends, 134, 135
in material world, 125, 127-28, 133,
134-35
by overeating, 51
scientists can’t stop, 133
_three typesof, 134
See also: Anxiety; Bondage, material;
Fear
Misidentification. See: Bodily concept;
Illusion
Missionary & devotee of Krsna, analogy
of, 78
Modern age. See: Civilization, modern,
Kali-yuga (present Age)
Modes of nature
conditioned soul under, 99
devotee surpasses, 87
living entity under, 23
Puranasfor men in, 27, 28
religions under, 34
See also: Maya; Nature, material;
specific modes (goodness, passion,
ignorance)

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Moksa. See: Liberation
Money
earning power vs. enjoying power,
15-16
mantra sold for, 47, 72
Monism. See: Impersonalism; Merging
with the Supreme
Moon
accompanying us, example of, 151
going to, 124,135
in spiritual sky unnecessary, 142
Mortal, all men are, example of, 43
Mother
in knowing-father-knowing-God
analogy, 140
serving child & devotee serving Krsna,
analogy of, 108
telling child to sit still, example of, 7
Vedas compared to, 53
Motion. See: Activity
Midha defined, 15, 16
Muhammadans, 118
Mukti. See: Liberation
Mukunda-lingalaya-darsane drsau
verse quoted, 60-61
Murdhny adhayatmanah pranam
verse quoted, 121
Mysticpowers, 3
Mystics. See: Spiritual master; Transcendentalists;, Yogis

N

Na ca tasman manusyesu
verse quoted, 70-71

Na cati-svapna-silasya
verse quoted, 51

Na dhanamna janam na sundarim
verse quoted, 2, 112

Na hi kalyana-krt kascid
verse quoted, 100

Na hy asannyasta-sankalpo
verse quoted, 13

Naite srti partha janan
verse quoted, 150-51

Index

Na jayate mriyate va kadacin
verse quoted, 32-33, 123
Namnam akari bahudha nija-sarva-saktis
verse quoted, 151-52
Namo maha-vadanyaya
quoted, 112
Nanda Maharaja, 115, 144
Napnuvanti mahatmanah
verse quoted, 133
Narada, 23
Narada-parcaratra, quoted on concentrating on Krsna, 88
Nasayamy atma bhava-stho
verse quoted, 44
Na tad bhasayate suryo
verse quoted, 52, 142
Na te viduh svartha-gatim hi visnum
quoted, 141
Nature, material
Krsna impregnates, with living
beings, 52 |
See also: Creation, the, Material world;
Matter; Maya; Modes of nature;
Universe (s)
Nature, spiritual, 139-43
See also: Soul; Spirit; Spiritual world
Naty-asnatas tu yogo 'sti
verse quoted, 51
Naty-ucchritam nati-nicam
verse quoted, 37-38
Neti neti process, 41
Nikhilasv apy avasthasu
quoted, 87
Nirguna defined, 38
Nirvana, 49, 50, 52
Nisprhah sarva-kamebhyo
verse quoted, 59-60
Nitya-yuktasya yoginah
quoted, 131
Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam
quoted, 32, 33, 36, 69
Nixon, President, 114
Nondevotees, 126
See also: Conditioned souls; Fruitive |
workers; Impersonalists;
Materialists

187

Nonviolence, Gandhi’s movement of,
46-47
Nrsimhadeva, Lord, 2

O

Ocean
sparrow vs., example of, 68
Spiritual bliss compared to, 10-11
Ocean rescue & Krsna consciousness,
analogy of, 144
Oil in water & spirit in matter, analogy of,

Om (kara), 124, 125
Onn ity ekaksaram brahma
verse quoted, 124
Om namo bhagavate vasudevaya
quoted, 41
Oneness with the Absolute. See: Impersonalism; Merging with the
Supreme
Oversoul. See: Supersoul

P

Pacific Ocean, bliss ocean surpasses, 10-11
Padam padam yad vipadam na tesam
quoted, 152
Padau hareh ksetra-padanusarpane
verse quoted, 60-61
Padma Purana
cited on Lord known by devotional service, 31
cited on species of life, 55
for goodness mode, 27, 28
quoted on Lord beyond sense perception but revealed by devotional
service, 27, 28, 143
Pain. See: Misery
Pan American, purchasing ticket on, example of, 145
Panthas tu koti-Sata-vatsara-sampragamyo
verse quoted, 130-31
 

 

188

Paramatma. See: Supersoul
Param dhama defined, 52
Param drstva nivartate
quoted, 146
Paras tasmat tu bhavo ‘nyo
verse quoted, 139
Parasya saktir vividhaiva Sriiyate
quoted, 80
Paro ‘pi manute ‘nartham
verse quoted, 23
Parsees, 101
Partha naiveha namutra
verse quoted, 100
Passion, mode of
city in, 38
God’s form not perceived in, 28
Puranas for men in, 27
Patient, protected, & surrendered soul,
analogy of, 65
Patitanam pavanebhyo
verse quoted, 70
Patram puspam phalam toyam
verse quoted, 30 )
Peace
by Krsna consciousness, 50
yogiachieves, 53
See also: Satisfaction
Perfection
by chanting Hare Krsna, 76, 119
by Krsna consciousness, 1, 61, 81, 135
of Krsna consciousness, 108, 117
of life, 121-22
of meditation, 8
of religion, 76
of yoga, 3-4, 14-15, 17, 19, 24, 47, 54,
60-61, 63-64, 76, 94, 95,
106-7, 111
Personalists, 124
See also: Devotees
Personality. See: Consciousness; Identity;
Self-realization; Soul
Philosophers
compared to frog in well, 129
God inconceivable to, 130-31
on mental platform, 88
passing away & returning, 150
Spiritual world as considered by, 145

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Philosophers
See also: Impersonalists; Janis; Scholars; Scientists, material; Spiritual master
Philosophy
of Krsna consciousness, 22
Mayavada vs. Vaisnava, 148
speculative, 145
See also: Absolute Truth; Knowledge
Pilgrimage places, 38
Pious activity, 16, 104, 111,117
Planets
created & destroyedcontinually, 138
higher, 122-23, 124, 135-38
living entities on, 136
in spiritual sky, 52, 122, 123-24, 139,
142, 147-48 ,
in universe, 135-36
See also: Earth planet; Sun; Universe(s)
Pleasure
in Krsna consciousness, 8-11
Krsna reservoir of, 123-24, 127
by love of God, 35
material vs. spiritual, 9-11, 126-27
real & unreal, 141
See also: Enjoyment; Happiness; Peace;
Satisfaction; Sense gratification
Policeman shooting & universal form,
analogy of, 116
Possessions
transcendentalist uninterested in, 36,
37,
See also: Money
Power, mystic, 3
Power to earn vs. power to enjoy,
15-16
Prahlada Maharaja, 2-3, 49
Pranavah sarva-vedesu
verse quoted, 80
Prapya punya-krtam lokan
verse quoted, 100
Prasdda (food offered to Krsna)
devotee giving, to cat, 79
as food transformed, 30
invitation to take, 79
of Jagannatha, 58, 59

Index

Prasada
partaking of, 9
Spiritual, 5
tongue controlled by, 20, 50
Prasanta-manasam hy enam
verse quoted, 77
Prasantatma vigata-bhir
verse quoted, 45
Pratyaksavagamam dharmyam
quoted, 94
verse quoted, 76
Prayana-kale manasacalena
verse quoted, 121-22
Prayata yanti tam kalam
verse quoted, 149
Prayatnad yatamanas tu
verse quoted, 102
Praying
as Caitanya taught, 144, 148
chanting Hare Krsnaas, 144
to Krsna, 117
material vs. spiritual, 112-13
See also: Meditation
Prema-bhakti platform, 118
Premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
quoted, 29-30
verse quoted, 83-84
Present Age. See: Kali-yuga (present Age)
President, United States
Kennedy, J.F., 49, 114
Nixon, 114
rivals of, example of, 147
trying to become, example of, 113-14
Prostitute in Bilvamangala story, 118-19
Puja defined, 28
Puranas, 27, 28
Purification
by chanting Hare Krsna, 104
of consciousness, 101-3
going to Godhead by, 106
by Krsna consciousness, 21
of mind, 145
sacrifices for, 2
of senses, 29-30, 31, 32
See also: Liberation
Purnam adah purnam idam
quoted, 119

189

Purnasya purnam adaya
quoted, 30

Purusah sa parah partha
verse quoted, 147

Purvabhyasena tenaiva
verse quoted, 101

Pushings, six, 75

R

Radha, 10, 114
Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvadmi, 82
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, 57-59, 82
Raja-vidyda raja-guhyam
verse quoted, 76
Rama in Hare Krsna mantra, 113, 144
Ramanujacarya, 72
Rasa defined, 10
Rasa-varjam raso ‘py asya
verse quoted, 146
Raso ‘ham apsu kaunteya
verse quoted, 80
Raso vai sah
quoted, 131
Ratrim yuga-sahasrantam
verse quoted, 136-37
Ratry-agame praliyante
verse quoted, 138
Ratry-agame ‘vasah partha
verse quoted, 138
Reality, 141
See also: Absolute Truth; Identity;
Spiritual world
Realization, spiritual. See: God realization,
Krsna consciousness; Selfrealization
Reasoning power
man wasting, 134 ,
See also: Intelligence, Knowledge
Reincarnation. See: Birth & death, repeated; Transmigration
Religion
first-class, 109
perfection of, 76
true & false, 34
in yugas, 137
190

Religion (continued)

See also: Devotional service, Krsna
consciousness; Love for God;
Purification; Worship

Renunciants. See: Sannyasis
Renunciation

work in, 2

as yoga, 13

See also: Detachment

Rituals, Vedic. See: Sacrifices
Rivers, sacred, 38
Rockefeller, Mr., 113

Rtipa Gosvami

as gosvami later, 74

quoted on bhakti-yoga, success in, 68

quoted on Caitanya Mahaprabhu, 112

quoted on devotee as liberated, 87

quoted on spiritual master, qualification of, 74-75

Spiritually rich, 81-82

5.
‘X
Sac-cid-dnanda defined, 123, 125
Sacred places, 38
Sacrifice (s)

of goat to goddess Kali, 27-28
for purification, 2
- See also: Renunciation
Sada tad-bhdava-bhavitah
quoted, 81
Sad-gosvamy-astaka, quoted on the six
Gosvamis, 81-82
Sddhusv api ca padpesu
verse quoted, 35
Sages
Krsna bewilders, 42
See also: Devotees, pure devotees;
Jiidnis; Spiritual master, Yogis
Sa gunan samatityaitan
verse quoted, 87
Sahasra-yuga-paryantam
verse quoted, 136-37
Salokya-mukti defined, 148
Salvation
pure devotee rejects, 3-4

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Salvation
See also: Krsna, protection by;
Liberation
Samadhi (trance), 26, 64, 83, 87, 88, 96,
128
See also: Meditation
Samah sarvesu bhitesu
verse quoted, 146
Samam kaya-siro-grivam
verse quoted, 45
Samipya defined, 148
Samo ‘ham sarva-bhutesu
verse quoted, 66
Sampreksya nasikagram svam
verse quoted, 45
Samsiddhim paramam gatah
quoted, 134
Samyak pranihite ‘male
_ quoted, 23
Sanaih sanair uparamed
verse quoted, 69
Sanatana defined, 140, 141
Sanadtana Gosvami, 74, 81-82
Sangat sanjdyate kamah
quoted, 102, 103
Sanga-tydagat sato vrtteh
verse quoted, 68
Sa niscayena yoktavyo
verse quoted, 67
Sankalpa-prabhavan kamams
verse quoted, 67
Sankarites, 145
Sankhya-purvaka-nama-gana-natibhih
quoted, 59
Sankhya-yoga, 1, 8, 41, 48
Sankirtana parties, 69
See also: Chanting (Hare Krsna);
Krsna consciousness, preaching of os
Sannyasis (renunciants), 1, 2, 3, 5, 137-38
Sdantim nirvana-paramam
quoted, 48, 53
verse quoted, 48
Sarsti defined, 148
Sartipya-mukti defined, 147-48
Sarva-bhutani kaunteya
verse quoted, 85

 

 

Index

Sarva-bhita-stham atmanam
verse quoted, 78
Sarva-bhuta-sthitam yo mam
verse quoted, 84
Sarva-dvarani samyamya
verse quoted, 121
Sarva-sankalpa-sannyasi
verse quoted, 15
Sarvatha vartamano ‘pi
verse quoted, 84
Sarva-yonisu kaunteya
verse quoted, 52
Sa sannyasica yogica
verse quoted, 1-2
Sat-cakra system, 124
Sat defined, 29
Satisfaction
of God realization, 17, 146
by Krsna consciousness, 146
See also: Enjoyment, Happiness; Peace;
Pleasure; Sense gratification
Satya-yuga, 93, 137
Sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh
quoted, 20, 54
verse quoted, 60-61
Sa vai pumsam paro dharmo
quoted, 34
verse quoted, 33-34, 108-9
Sdyujya-muktidefined, 148
Scholars |
Krsna often misunderstood by, 32
See also: Philosophers
Scientists, material, 122, 128, 133
See also: Philosophers |
Secluded place, living in, 36-37, 38
Seeing sun & seeing Supreme, analogy of,69
Self. See: Consciousness; Identity; Selfrealization; Soul
Self-realization
basis of, 97
by bhakti-yoga, 94
by chanting Hare Krsna, 76
failure in, 97-100
vs. illusion, 98-99
by Krsna consciousness, 76
Krsna consciousness beyond, 83
mind controlled in, 95

191

Self-realization
person established in, 26
three ways to, 98
yoga as, 13
See also: God realization; Identity;
Knowledge; Transcendence
Sense gratification
animalistic, 56
fruitive activities for, 15-18
vs. Krsna consciousness, 18
as material contamination, 103
material world based on, 35
money used for, 16
yogirenounces, 13-14, 15, 18
See also: Enjoyment; Happiness, Lust;
Peace, Pleasure; Satisfaction;
Sex life
Sense perception, Krsna beyond, 27, 29,
143-44
Senses
controlling us or controlled by us,
714-76
of God, 30-31
imperfect, 53, 140
in Krsna’s service, 6, 21
mindabove, 20, 21, 74, 144
objects of, attraction to, 21-22
purification of, 29-30, 31, 32
service to, 114-15
ten named, 143-44
yoga to control, 14, 20
yogi's detachment from, 121, 122
See also: Body, material; Intelligence;
Mind
Service
material vs. spiritual, 114
See also: Devotional service
Sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
quoted, 29, 31
verse quoted, 27, 143
Sex life
for begetting children, 47
control for, 67
determination by giving up, 46-47,
67-68
Gandhi gave up, 46-47
Krsna consciousness above, 146
192

Sex life (continued)
licit & illicit, 104, 105
material & spiritual, 127
yogiabstains from, 14, 45-47, 67
See also: Desires, material, Lust, Sense
gratification
Shoe, seeing child’s, example of, 83
Siksastaka, quotations from
on Krsna, His holy names, & chanting,
151-52
on pure devotional attitude, 2, 112
On serving Krsna again, 115
Sin, 35, 105
_ Seealso: Contamination, material
Sitosna-sukha-duhkhesu
verse quoted, 26
Sleep, awaking from, & chanting Hare
Krsna, analogy of, 144
Sleeping, temperance in, 51, 57,59
Snakes, deerskin repels, 46
Society, human
disposing of dead body, 101
See also: Civilization, modern; Human
‘ life; Kali-yuga
Society for Krsna consciousness. See:
Krsna consciousness movement
Son, submissive, & surrendered soul,
analogy of, 66
So ‘py asti yat-prapada-simny.avicintya-tattve
verse quoted, 130-31
Soul
active, 8
in body, 49, 139, 143
body as disease of, 54
body developed by, 51-52
body sustained by, 124
enjoys with Supersoul, 65
eternal, 32-33, 49, 123, 143
individual, 125
intelligence, mind, & senses subordinate to, 21
maya covering, 24
size of, 4
transmigration of, 32, 101-2
See also: Consciousness, Living entities, Spirit
Souls, conditioned. See: Conditioned souls

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Souls, liberated, 9, 147-48
See also: Devotees, pure devotees;
Mahatma; Spiritual master
Sound, transcendental. See: Hare Krsna
mantra; Om(kara)
Space travel, 122, 124
Sparrow’s determination, example of, 68
Species of life, 52, 55, 89
See also: Animals, Human life; Living
entities
Speculation, mental
God not known by, 43, 44, 145, 147
See also: Impersonalism
Spirit, 4, 5
See also: Body, spiritual, Nature, spiritual; Soul; Spiritual world
Spiritual life, 7-8
See also: Advancement, spiritual;
Bhakti-yoga; Devotional service,
‘Krsna consciousness; Religion;
Yoga
Spiritual master (guru)
bogus vs. bona fide, 74-75
cheating, 47
disciple of, 118-19
knowledge by hearing from, 130
See also: Authority, spiritual; Devotees, pure devotees; Liberated
souls, Mahatma |
Spiritual world, 110
anxiety-free, 9
birth in, 106
Krsna active in, 8
via Krsna consciousness, 127, 128
living entities in, 141, 147
luminous, 142
material world vs, 4, 52-53, 127,
139-43, 147
philosopher’s opinion of, 145
planets in, 52, 122, 123-24, 139, 142,
147-48
promotion to, 117, 122, 123-24, 125,
127 |
as Spiritual energy, 80
See also: Goloka Vrndavana; Kingdom
of God; Krsna, abode of;
Krsnaloka; Nature, spiritual

Index

Sraddhavan bhajate yo mam
__ verse quoted, 107
Sravanam defined, 44
Sravanam kirtanam visnoh
quoted, 44
Sridhara Svami, quoted on material &
. spiritual worlds, 141
Srimad-Bhagavatam
See also: Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations from
cited on attempts to measure the
Supreme, 130
cited on spiritual sky’s residents, 141,
147
cited on sun, 149-50
cited on Supreme’s parts & parcels, 110
God's greatness known via, 118
_ superexcellence of, 42-43
Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations from
on Ambarisa engaged in Lord’s service, 60-61
on danger at every step, 152
on devotees ‘‘conquering”’ Krsna by
hearing of Him, 129 —
on devotional service, unmotivated &
uninterrupted, 33-34, 108-9
on devotion & detachment, 145
on fearlessness by Krsna consciousness, 46
On impersonalists falling back to material world, 126
on Krsna as Absolute Truth, 41-42
on Krsna as only protector, 65
on livingentity under modes of nature,
23
on Lord known by Hisgrace, not
speculation, 43
on materialists, 136
on material world, 141
on people not knowing self-interest,
141
On pious acts, promotion to perfection
by, 117
on real religion, 34
on Vyasa seeing Lord & maya, 22-23
Srinivasa Acarya, quoted on the six
Gosvamis, 81-82

193

Srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka
verse quoted, 116-17
Staircase & yoga system, analogy of, 111
Standard of life, 16
Stars. See: Horoscope; Planets; Sun;
Universe(s)
Stepladder & yoga system, analogy of, 18
Sthanad bhrastah patanty adhah
quoted, 110
Sthane sthitah Sruti-gatam tunu-vanmanobhir
verse quoted, 129
Stotra-ratna, quoted on serving the Lord,
happiness by, 66
Sucau dese pratisthapya
_ verse quoted, 37-38
Sucinam srimatam gehe
quoted, 118
verse quoted, 100
Suffering. See: Misery
Suhrn-mitrdry-udasina
verse quoted, 35
Sukham atyantikam yat tad
verse quoted, 63-64
Sukham va yadi va duhkham
verse quoted, 88-89
Sukhena brahma-samsparsam
_ verse quoted, 77
Sukla-krsne gatihy ete
verse quoted, 150
Sun
Krsna compared to, 19, 22, 54, 147
location & movements of, 149-50
in spiritual sky unnecessary, 52-53,
142

Sun, seeing, & seeing Supreme Self,
analogy of, 69
Sun rising & God revealing Himself,
analogy of, 31
Sun’s reflections & Supersoul’s expansions, analogy of, 86-87
Supersoul (Paramatma)
in heart of all, 86-87
Krsna as, 65
mind controlled by, 26
soul enjoys with, 65
yogi meditates on, 84, 86, 87
 

 

194

Supersoul (continued)
See also: Visnu, Lord

Supreme Lord. See: God; Krsna, Lord
(Supreme Personality of Godhead)

Surabhi cows, 127
Svamidefined, 74

Svamin krtartho ‘smi varam na yace

quoted, 16
Svaripa Damodara, quoted on

Raghunatha’s renunciation, 58

T

Tad aham bhakty-upahrtam
verse quoted, 30

Tad eva mé darsaya deva ripam
verse quoted, 115

Tamasi ma jyotir gama
quoted, 142

Tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti
quoted, 54 .

Tamtam niyamam asthaya
verse quoted, 108

Tam vid yad duhkha-samyogaverse quoted, 64

Tan-mayo bhavati ksipram
verse quoted, 88

Tapasvibhyo ‘dhiko yogi
verse quoted, 106

Tasam brahma mahad yonir
verse quoted, 52

Tasmat sarvesu kalesu
verse quoted, 150-51

Taste, material vs. spiritual, 10

Tasyaham na pranasyami
verse quoted, 81

Tas yaham nigraham manye
verse quoted, 94

Tas yaham sulabhah partha
quoted, 128-29
verse quoted, 128

Tatas tato niyamyaitad
verse quoted, 73

Tato mam tattvato jnatva
verse quoted, 44, 112

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Tatra candramasann jyotir
verse quoted, 150
Tatraikagram manah krtva
verse quoted, 37-38
Tatra prayata gacchanti
verse quoted, 149
Tatra tam buddhi-samyogam
verse quoted, 100
Tat sadhu manye ‘sura-varya dehinam
quoted, 49
Teacher, spiritual. See: Spiritual master
Te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
verse quoted, 104
Tejo-vari-mrdam yatha vinima yo yatra trisargo mrsa
verse quoted, 41-42
Temple, Krsna, 38
Tesam evanukampartham
verse.quoted, 44
Time, mudha wastes, 15, 16
Time on higher planets, 123
Times to pass from world, 149-51
Tongue
as instrument to become Krsna conscious, 119
prasada controls, 20, 50
as pushing agent, 75
Touchstone (cintamani), 127
Trance (samadhi), 26, 64, 83, 87, 88, 96,
128
See also: Meditation
Transcendence
deviation from, 99
person situated in, 26, 60
See also: Godhead, returning to;
Liberation; Self-realization;
Spiritual world
Transcendentalist

compared to lamp in windless place, 63

God's kingdom attained by, 48
indestructible, 100
instructions for, 36-37

perfecting consciousness from previous

life, 100-101
See also: Devotees; Impersonalists;
Jrianis; Yogis

Index

Transmigration of the soul, 32, 101-2
See also: Birth & death, repeated;
Bondage, material
Tree, seeing Krsna in, example of, 82-83
Trees, desire, 127
Treta-yuga, 93, 137
Truth
searching for, compared to buying
gold, 31
See also: Absolute Truth
Tvad-an yah samsayasyas ya
verse quoted, 99
Tyaktva deham punar janma
verse quoted, 106
Tyaktva turnam asesa-mandala-pati-srenim
sada tucchavat
verse quoted, 81-82

U

Uddhared atmanatmanam
verse quoted, 18
Universal form of the Supreme, 115-16
Universal vision, 83, 89
Universe (s)
creation & destruction continual in,
137-38 ;
duration of, 137
Lord controls, 113
Maha-Visnu exhales & inhales, 85-86
planetary systems in, 135-36
sun center of, 149-50
temporary, 41-42
yogitravels, 122, 124

See also: Creation, the, Material world;

Nature, material
Upadesamrta, quotations from
on bhakti-yoga, success in, 68
On spiritual master, qualification of,
74-75
Upaiti santa-rajasam
verse quoted, 77
Upavisyasane yunijyad
verse quoted, 37-38
USA. See: America

195

Utsahan nisca yad dhairyat
verse quoted, 68

V

Vaco vegam manasah krodha-vegam
verse quoted, 75
Vaikuntha defined, 9
See also: Spiritual world
Vaisnavas. See: Devotees
Vaisnavism, 117, 148
Vancha-kalpatarubhyas ca
verse quoted, 70
Vandanam defined, 44
Vasudeva, 41
Vasyatmana tu yatata
verse quoted, 95
Veda defined, 43
Veda-mata defined, $3
Vedanta-sutra, quotations from,
on Absolute Truth, 28, 41, 43
on God's blissfulness, 9
Vedas, 53
Vedic literature
compared to doctor’s prescription, 28
God’s senses explained in, 30
planets described in, 122, 123
See also: Bhagavad-gita; SrimadBhagavatam; Vedas; other specific
Vedic literatures
Vegam defined, 75
Vetti yatra na caivayam
‘verse quoted, 63-64
Vinasam avyayasyasya
verse quoted, 143
Visa ya vinivartante
verse quoted, 146
Visnu, Lord
all-pervading, 88
Krsna origin of, 45, 53, 84-85, 86, 94
meditation on, 45, 47-48, 124
as yoga’s aim, 94
See also: Garbhodakasayi Visnu,
Ksirodakasayi Visnu;, MahaVisnu; Supersoul

 
196

Visnu Purana, quoted on mind as binder or
liberator, 22
Visnur mahansa iha yasya kala-viseso
verse quoted, 84-85
Visvamitra Yogi, 3
Visva-rupa form, 115-16
Void, the, 51-52, 95-96, 145
See also: Brahmajyoti; Nirvana
Voidists, 3
See also: Buddhists; Impersonalists
Vrndavana (on Earth), 117, 128, 134
Vrndavana (Goloka), 11,53, 106, 110,
117, 134, 136
See also: Krsna, abode of; Krsnaloka
Vulture & sense enjoyer, analogy of, 56
Vyakta defined, 140
Vyasadeva, 23

W

Wartime in Calcutta (1942), 116
Water, 80-81 | |
Water, oil in, & spirit in matter, analogy
of, 4 :

Wealth. See: Money; Possessions
Wind, mind compared to, 8
Wisdom. See: Absolute Truth; Knowledge
Work

Krsna free of, 10

& pleasure, 9-10

in renunciation, 2

for satisfying Krsna, 5

senses for doing, 144

spiritual world free of, 9

transmigration according to, 32, 101-2

in yoga system, 14
See also: Activity
World. See: Earth planet; Material world
Worship, 108
See also: Devotional service; Love for
God

Y

Yada hi nendriyarthesu
verse quoted, 15

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Yada viniyatam cittam
verse quoted, 59-60
Yad gatva na nivartante
quoted, 142
verse quoted, 52, 142
Yah prayatityajandeham
verse quoted, 124
Yah sa sarvesu bhutesu
quoted, 141
verse quoted, 139
Ya idam paramam guhyam
verse quoted, 70
Yajnas. See: Sacrifices
Yam labdhva caparam labham
verse quoted, 64
Yam prapya na nivartante
verse quoted, 142
Yam sannyasam iti prahur
verse quoted, 13
Yam syamasundaram acintya-gunasvarupam
verse quoted, 83-84
Yamunacarya, quoted on serving the
Lord, happiness by, 66
Yare dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna'-upadesa
verse quoted, 36
Yasmin sthito na duhkhena
verse quoted, 64
Yasyaika-nisvasita-kalam athavalambya
verse quoted, 84--85
Yasyantah-sthani bhutani
verse quoted, 147
Yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasadah
quoted, 119 :
Yatate ca tato bhiyah
verse quoted,. 100
Yatha dipo nivata-stho
verse quoted, 63
Yato bhaktir adhoksaje
quoted, 109
Yato yato niscalati
verse quoted, 73
Yatra caivatmanatmanam
verse quoted, 63-64
Yatra kale tvanavrttim
verse quoted, 149
Yatra tri-sargo ‘mrsa
quoted, 141

 

Index

Yatroparamate cittam
verse quoted, 63-64 |
Yat satyataya mithya
quoted, 141
Yaya sammohito jiva
verse quoted, 23
Ye bhajanti tumam bhaktya
verse quoted, 66
Ye ‘nye ‘ravindaksa vimukta-maninas
verse quoted, 126
Yesam tv anta-gatam papam
verse quoted, 104
Yoga
artificial attempts at, 73
attainment of, 14-16
in Bhagavad-gita, \
as cleansing off contamination, 103
compared to ladder, 18
compared tostaircase, 111
defined, 13, 15, 16, 121
as detachment from sensual activities,
121, 122
eight stages of, 14
failure in, 99-100
first instruction in, 55
God as goal of, 18, 36
in Kali-yuga, 92-94
Krsna consciousness perfection of, 1,
18, 24, 54, 88, 96, 107
Krsna describes, 45
Krsna objective of, 50
love for God perfects, 109
material desire absent in, 60, 61
materialexistence ended by, 50
mind controlled in, 19-20, 23, 25, 60,
63-64, 73, 74, 75, 95
moderation in, 54
neophyte & perfectionalstages of, 14
perfection of, 3-4, 14-15, 17, 19, 24,
47, 54,.60-61, 63-64, 76, 94, 95,
97-98, 106-7, 111
in previous life & present practice, 102
purpose of, 36, 45, 54, 94, 97-98, 124
renunciation as, 13
as Self-realization, 73
for sense control, 14, 20
sex forbidden in, 14
Sitting place for, 37-38

197

Yoga
‘*societies’’ for, 38, 45-46, 50, 93, 95,
96, 98
stages of, 111
true & false, 45-47
Visnu aim of, 94
yogiattaining, 60
See also: Krsna consciousness, Meditation, Transcendence; specific
types of yoga
Yogac calita-manasah
quoted, 99
Yoga indriya-samyamah
quoted, 20
Yogarudhasya tasyaiva
verse quoted, 14
Yogi(s)
detached from sensual activities, 121,
122
determination required for, 68-69
devotee best among, 78, 87
devotee more compassionate than,
69-70
false, 14
fearlessness required for, 46
greatness of, 106-7
happiness of, 77
in India, 38, 46, 72
leaving material world forever, 133
liberationdemanded by, 113
Lord’s abode reached by, 53
material desires absent in, 16
meditates on Supersoul, 84, 86, 87
on mental plane, 131
mind to be controlled by, 74
Oneness with Supreme wanted by, 3
passing away & returning, 150
perfect example of, 1, 3, 88-89
planetary transfer by, 122, 124, 125
powersof, 3
practicing to perfection, 102
renounces sense gratification, 13-14,
15, 18
sees Krsna everywhere, 78, 79-80
sees Lord within himself, 84
selfish desires of, 3
self-satisfied, 69-70
sex forbidden for, 45-47, 67
 

198

Yogis (continued)
sitting place for, 37-38
symptoms of, 26
topmost type of, 107, 128
unsuccessful, 100, 106
yoga attained by, 60
See also: Devotees; Transcendentalists

Yoginam api sarvesam
verse quoted, 107

Yogino yata-cittasya
verse quoted, 63

Yogi yurijita satatam
verse quoted, 36

Yo mam pasyati sarvatra
verse quoted, 81

Yo ‘yam yogas tvayd proktah
verse quoted, 8, 81

Yugas defined, 137

THE PATH OF PERFECTION

Yugas
See also: Satya-yuga; Treta-yuga:
Dvapara-yuga; Kali-yuga
Yuktahara-vihdrasya
verse quoted, 51,57
Yukta ity ucyate yogi
verse quoted, 26
Yukta-svapnavabodhasya
verse quoted, 51, 57
Yufijann evam sadatmanam (Bg. 6.15)
verse quoted, 48
Yufijann evam sadatmanam (Bg. 6.28)
verse quoted, 77

Z

Zero, God cannot be, 43
See also: Void, the

 

|
|
|

 

ISKCON Centers Around the World

 

AFRICA: Durban (Natal), S. Africa—P.O. Box 212, Cato Ridge, Natal 3680/ Cato Ridge 237: Johannesburg, S. Africa—3 Hunter St., Highlands, 2191 /6140634; Lagos, Nigeria—P.O. Box 8793, West Africa:
Mombasa, Kenya, E. Africa—Madhavani House, Sauti Ya Kenya and Kisumu Rd., P.O. Box 82224 / 312248;
Nairobi, Kenya, E. Africa—Puran Singh Close, P.O. Box 28946 / 331568: Mauritius—Seewoopaul Bidg.,
Royal Rd., Lallmatie (mail: P.O. Box 718, Port Louis, Mauritius).

ASIA

INDIA: Ahmedabad, Gujarat—7, Kailas Society, Ashram Rd., 380 009 / 49935: Bangalore, Mysore—40
Hare Krishna Rd.. 560 001/ 77664; Bhadrak, Orissa—Gour Gopal Mandir, Kuans, P.O. Bhadrak, Dist.
Balasore: Bhubaneswar, Orissa—National Highway No. 5, Nayapalli (mail: c/o P.O. Box 173, 751 001) /
53125: Bombay, Maharastra—Hare Krishna Land, Juhu, 400 054/ 566-860; Calcutta, W. Bengal—3
Albert Rd., 700 017 / 44-3757: Chandigarh, Punjab—Hare Krishna Land, Dakshin Marg, Sector 36-B, 160
023; Chhaygharia (Haridaspur), W. Bengal—Thakur Haridas Sripatbari Sevashram, P.O. Chhaygharia, P.S.
Bongaon. Dist. 24 Pargonas: Derwa, Bihar—P.O. Derwa, Dist. Rohtas; Gauhati, Assam—Post Bag No. 127,
781 001: Gurura, Bihar—P.O. Kudra, Dist. Rohtas; Hyderabad, A.P.—Hare Krishna Land, Nampally Station
Rd., 500 001/ 51018; Imphal, Manipur—Paona Bazar, 795 001; Mayapur, W. Bengal—Shree Mayapur
Chandrodaya Mandir, P.O. Shree Mayapur Dham (District Nadia); New Delhi, U.P.—21A Feroze Gandhi Rd.,
Lajpat Nagar Ill, 110 024 / 624-590: Tekari, Bihar—P.O. Barailla, Dist. Rohtas; Vrindavan, U.P.—KrishnaBalarama Mandir, Bhaktivedanta Swami Marg, Raman Reti, Mathura / 178.

FARMS: Hyderabad, A.P.—P.O. Dabilpur Village, Medchal Taluq, Hyderabad District, 501 401;
Mayapur, W. Bengal—(contact ISKCON Mayapur).

OTHER COUNTRIES: Bangkok, Thailand—P.O. Box 12-1108; Colombo, Sri Lanka—188, New Chetty
St., Colombo 13/ 33325: Hong Kong—5 Homantin St., Flat 23, Kow!oon / 3-029113; Jakarta, Indonesia—
Flat 78, Jalan Kebon Sirih 40, Jakarta Pusat.; Kathmandu, Nepal—8/6, Battis Putali, Goshalla; Malaysia—1,
Lintang Melur, Mk 14, Butterworth, P.W. Malaysia; Mandaue City, Philippines—231 Pagsabungan Rd.,
Basak, Cebu/ 83254; Tehran, Iran—Felistin Ave. (old Kakh), Shemshad St. No. 3/ 644-272; Tel Aviv,
Israel— 147 Hanassi St., Herzliya Pituah/ 938-846.

AUSTRALASIA: Adelaide, Australia— 13-A Frome St. / (08)223-2084; Auckland, New Zealand—Hwy. 18,
Riverhead (next to Huapai Golfcourse) (mail: c/o R.D. 2, Kumeu) / 412-8075; Lautoka, Fiji—5 Tavewa Ave.
(mail: c/o P.O. Box 125) / 61-633, ext. 48; Melbourne, Australia— 197 Danks St., Albert Park, Melbourne,
Victoria 3206 (mail: c/o P.O. Box 125) / 699-5122; Sydney, Australia—112 Darlinghurst Rd., King’s Cross,
N.S.W. (mail: c/o P.O. Box 159) / (02)357-5162.

FARMS: Auckland, New Zealand (New Varshana)—contact ISKCON Auckland; Colo, Australia
(Bhaktivedanta Ashram)—Upper Colo Rd., N.S.W. (mail: clo P.O. Box 493, St. Mary's, 2760, N.S.W.)/
04-565-5284; Murwillumbah, Australia (New Govardhana)—‘Eungella, Tyalgum Rd. via Murwillumbah,
N.S.W., 2484 (mail: c/o P.O. Box 687) / 066-721903. .

EUROPE: Athens, Greece—133 Solonos; Amsterdam, Holland—Herengracht 96 / 020-24 94 10: Barcelona, Spain—Pintor Fortuny 11, Barcelona, 1 / 319-69-53; Catania, Sicily—Via Empedocle 84, 95100/

095-552-252; Dublin, lreland—2 Belvedere Place, Dublin 1; Duedingen, Switzerland—im Stillen Tal, CH

3186 Duedingen (FR) / (037) 43.26.97: Frankfurt a. Main, W. Germany—Schloss Rettershof uber, 6233
Kelkheim, Ts./ 06174-21357; Gallarate, Italy—Via A Volta 19, Gallarate 20131 (VR) / 0331-783-268;
Lausanne, Switzerland —11 rue César-Roux, CH-1005 / (021)20.06.21; London, England (city)— 10 Soho
St.. London W1 / 001-437-1835; London, England (country) —Bhaktivedanta Manor, Letchmore Heath, Watford, Hertfordshire WD2 8EP/ Radlett (09276) 7244; Madrid, Spain—Calle Arturo Sorio No. 209; Paris,
France—20 rue Vieille du Temple, Paris 75004 / 500-63-58;: Rome, Italy—Salita del Poggio Laurentino 7,
Rome 00144 / (06)593-075; Stockholm, Sweden—Korsnas Gard, 140 32 Grodinge / 0753-29151; Vienna,
Austria—2103 Langenzersdorf, Haaderstrasse 28 / 02244-29912.

FARMS: Valencay, France (New Mayapur)—Lucay-Le-Male, 36 600 / (54)40-23-26; London, England—(contact Bhaktivedanta Manor); Perignano, Italy—Via Delle Colline, Localita, La Meridiana, Perignano, Pisa/ (0587)-616194.
ee

" acopisy oto. 0a ar i
me Lie OS ee bbenh

MR Tn

LATIN AMERICA

 

BRAZIL: Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais—Rua dos Pampas. 123, Prado / 3371337; Curitiba, Parana—
Rua Coronel Dulcidio 836. Batel: Porto Alegre, RS—Rua Guananas 117, Guaruja 90000: Recife, Pernambuco—Ave 17 de Agosto 257. Parnamirim 50000: Rio de Janeiro, RJ—R. Hemenergildo de Barros 21,
Gloria 20241: Salvador, Bahia—Ave. Otavio Mangabeira 97-A. Itapoa 40000: Sao Paulo, SP—R. Pandia
Calogeras 54. Liberdade 01525.

FARMS: Feira de Santana, Bahia (Chacara Hridayananda)—BR 324, Km 99; Pindamonhangaba,
Sao Paulo (New Gokula)—Ribeirao Grande C.P. 108. 12400.

OTHER COUNTRIES: Bogota, Colombia—Carrera 3A No. 54-A-72/ 255-9842: Cuzco, Peru— Avenida
Pardo No. 1036/ 2277: Georgetown, Guyana—24 Uitvilugt Front. West Coast Demerara; Guadalajara,
Mexico—Avenida las Americas No. 225. Sector Hidalgo’ 163455: Guatemala City, Guatemala—
Segunda Calle 6-26, Zona 13/ 310833; La Paz, Bolivia—Calle Chacaltaya No. 587/ 32-85-67; |
Lima, Peru—Jiron Junin 415, Lima / 47-18-10; Medellin, Colombia—Carrera 32, No. 54-42: Mexico City,
Mexico—Gob. Tiburcio Montiel 45. San Miguel Chapultepec. Mexico D.F. 18/ (905)271-0132: Panama |
City. Panama— 43-58 Via Espafia Altos. Al Lado del Cine. Bella Vista: Quito, Ecuador—Calle Yasuni No.
404: St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago—Gordon St. at Santa Margarita Circular Rd. / 662-4605: San
José, Costa Rica—400 mtrs. Sur Centro Medico de Guadalupe (casa blanca esquinera) Colonia
Chapultepec. Guadalupe: San Salvador, E! Salvador—67 Avenida Sur No. 115, Colonia Escalon / 243 445;

Santiago, Chile—Eyzaguirre 2404, Puente Alto/ 283. |

NORTH AMERICA

CANADA: Edmonton, Alberta—11009 131st St./ (403)453-7196: Montreal, Quebec— 1626 Pie IX
Boulevard. H1V 2C5/ (514) 527-1101: Ottawa, Ontario— 1429 Cyrville Rd. K1B 3L7/ (613)741-8518;
Toronto, Ontario—243 Avenue Rd. M5R 2J6/ (416)922-5415: Vancouver, British Columbia—5580 S.E.
Marine Dr. Burnaby V5J 3G8/ (604)433-8216.
FARM: Hemingford. Quebec (New Nandagram)—315 Backbrush Rd. RR. No. 2, JOL 1HO/ (514)247-3429

U.S.A.: Atlanta, Georgia— 1287 Ponce de Leon Ave. NE 30306 / (404)378-9182: Austin, Texas— 1910
Whitis Ave. 78705/ (512)476-7138: Baltimore, Maryland—200 Bloomsbury Ave.. Catonsville 21228 /
(301)747-9815: Berkeley, California—2334 Stuart St. 94705/ (415) 843-7874: Boston, Massachusetts—72 Commonwealth Ave. 02116/ (617)536- 1695: Chicago, Illinois—1014 Emerson St. Evanston
60201 / (312)273-3960: Cleveland, Ohio— 15720 Euclid Ave.. E. Cleveland 44112/ (216)851-9367: Columbus, Ohio—99 East 13th Ave. 43201 / (614) 299-5084: Coral Hills, Maryland—4715 Marlboro Pike
20028 / (301)568-9194: Dallas, Texas—5430 Gurley Ave. 75223/ (214)827-6330: Denver, Colorado—
1400 Cherry St. 80220 / (303)333-5461: Detroit, Michigan—383 Lenox Ave. 48215/ (313)824-6000:
Gainesville, Florida—921 S.W. Depot Ave. 32601 / (904)377-1496: Gurabo, Puerto Rico—Box 215 B,
Route 181. Santarita 00658: Hartford. Connecticut—84 Silver Lane 06118/ (203)568-1422: Honolulu,
Hawaii—51 Coelho Way 96817/ (808)595-3947: Houston, Texas—1111 Rosalie St. 77004/ (713)526-9860: Laguna Beach, California—644 S. Coast Hwy. 92651 / (714)497-3638: Las Vegas, Nevada—
6601 Painted Desert Dr. 89108/ (702)645-4934: Los Angeles, California—3764 Watseka Ave. 90034 /
(213) 871-0717: Miami, Florida— 10900 Coral Way 33165/ (305)552-1766: New Orleans, Louisiana—
2936 Esplanade Ave. 701197 (504)488-7433: New York, New York—340 W. 55th St. 10019/ (212)765-8610: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania— 41-51 West Allens Lane. 19119/ (215)247-4600: Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania— 1112 N. Negley Ave. 15026 / (412)362-0212: Portland, Oregon— 2805 S.E. Hawthorne St.
97214 / (503)231-5792: St. Louis, Missourt— 3926 Lindell Blvd. 63108 / (314)535-8085: Salt Lake City,
Utah—859 Park St 84102/ (801)355-2626: San Diego, California— 1030 Grand Ave. Pacific Beach
92109/ (714)483-2500: San Juan, Puerto Rico— 1016 Ponce de Leon St. Rio Piedras, 00925/ (809)- .
765-4745: Seattle. Washington—400 18th Ave. East 98112/ (206)322-3636: State College, Pennsylvania— 103 E. Hamilton Ave. 16801 / (814)234- 1867: Washington, D.C.— 10310 Oaklyn Rd.. Potomac, ;
Maryland 20854 / (301)299-2100.
FARMS: Carriere, Mississippi (New Tdalavan)—Rt. No. 2. Box 449, 39426/ (601)798-6705:;
Gainesville, Florida—contact ISKCON Gainesville: Hopland, California (Mount Kailas)—Route 175. Box
469. 95449/ (707)744-1100: Hotchkiss, Colorado (New Barshana)—P.O. Box 112, 81419/ (303)527-4584: Lynchburg, Tennessee (Murari-sevaka)—Rt. No. 1, Box 146-A, (Mulberry) 37359/ (615)759-7058: Moundsville. West Virginia (New Vrindaban)—R_D. No. 1. Box 319, Hare Krishna Ridge 26041 / '
(304)845-2790: Port Royal, Pennsylvania (Gita-nagari)—R.D. No. 1. 17082 / (717)527-2493. |

   

 
(continued from front flap)
greatest modern exponents of yoga and
of the Indian spiritual tradition. Srila
Prabhupada’s talks, based upon the
Bhagavad-gitd, probe deeply into questions
concerning the nature of consciousness,
meditation, karma, death, and reincarnation, and reveal clearly how even those of
us entangled in the complexity and chaos
of modern materialistic life can begin a
simple practice that elevates our consciousness and puts us in touch with the
Supreme Consciousness.

Srila Prabhupida (1896-1977) was
a true spiritual genius who succeeded in
articulating the essence of India’s perennial and universal spiritual wisdom in a
form easily comprehensible and sublimely practicable for twentieth century
mankind. His unique genius inspired Sri
Lal Bahadur Shastri, the late prime
minister of India, to declare that the
writings of Srila Prabhupdda ‘“‘are a significant contribution to the salvation of
mankind.” This new publication, The
Path of Perfection, is destined to become a
classic.

 

Jacket Design: Indra Pramada
Jacket Illustration: Jagat Karana
THE PATH OF
pERFECTION

It’s not about what w st people think yoga is. For most
of us, the term conjures in the mind an image of sonse
skinny, half-naked fellow contorted into a human
pretzel, or perhaps a room full of corpulent matrons in
black leotards, struggling to stand on their heads in
hopes of i improving their health, losing weight, or increasing their waning sexual powers.

The Path of Perfection offers a brilliant exposition on
the path of bhakti-yoga, a simple but all-inclusive

form of yoga for the modern age. Even those who are
entangled in the complexity and chaos of modern materialistic life can begin a simple practice that purifies
the mind and elevates the consciousness.

In The Path of Perfection, the world’s most dis_ tinguished teacher of Vedic culture and philosophy, His
~ Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, frees us from the meaninglessness that threatens
our individual and collective sanity.
Pha a
;

 
