 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
FATHER AND SON
 
 
 
Gusse
FATHER AND SON
A STUDY OF TWO TEMPERAMENTS:

 

 

Pa

 

WILLIAM HEINEMANN
 
PREFACE

‘Ar the present hour, when fiction takes forms
0 ingenious and so specious, it is perhaps
necessary to say that the following naerative,
in al its pacts, and so far as the punctilions
attention ofthe writer has been able to keep
itso, is serupulously true. If it were not true,
in this strict sense, to publish it would be to
trille with all those who may be induced to
read it. Tes offered to them as a document
fa record of educational and religious con.
ditions which, having passed away, wil never
etum. In this respect as the diagnosis of
dying Puritanism, it is hoped that. the
rnarative will not be altogether without
significance

Tt offers, too, in a subsidiary sense, a study
‘of the development of moral and intellectual
ideas during the progress of infancy. "These
hhave been closely and conscientiously noted,
‘and may have some value in consequence of

 

 

 

252859
PREFACE
‘the unusual conditions in which they were
produced, ‘The author has observed that
those who have written about the facts of
their own childhood have usually delayed to
rote them doven until age has dimmed their
recollections. Pethaps an even more com!
fault in such autobiographies is that they are
sentimental, and are falsified by self admiration
tnd selfpity. "The writer of these recollections
Inus thought bat if the examination of his
caliest years was to be undertaken at all, it
should be attempted while his memory is stil
perfetly vivid and while he is stil unbiased
by the forgetfulness or the sensibility of advancing years.

"At ote point only Is there been any
tampering with precise fact, Tt i believed
that, with the exception of the Son, there
is but one person mentioned in this book
‘who is still alive. Nevertheless, it has been
thought well, in order to avoid any appeartance of offence, to alter the majority of
‘the proper mimes of the private persons
spoken of

‘As regards the anonymous writer himself,
‘whether the reader does or does not recognise
‘an old aoquaintanee,cccasionally met with in
‘ite other Reds, sa matter of to importance,

 

 
PREFACE
Here no fort has been made to conceal orto
identity

Te is not usual, perhaps, thatthe nretive
of 8 pinta! struggle should mingle mer
Tent and humour with a discussion of the
‘most solemn subject. Tt bas, however, been
Incritable tht they should be so mingled in
this nartive. It iy true that most funny
Books try to be funny. throughout, while
theology is seandalined i it awakens a single

le. But life ix not constituted thus, and
this book is nothing if iis not a genaine
slice of tie. "There was an extrardinary
Instore of comedy and tragedy in the situa
tion which is ere deserted, and those who
ae alected by the pathos of it will not need
to have it explained to them thatthe comedy
‘eas superfidal and the tragedy ental

 

 

Sper 19
 
 

CHAPTER 1

“Tras book isthe record of «struggle between
too temperaments, two consciences and almost
tivo epochs. Tt ended, as was inevitable, in
disruption, OF the two human beings here
Aeseribed, one was bora to fly backward, the
‘other could not help being carried forward,
‘There eame a time when neither spoke the
same language a8 the other, or encompassed
the same hopes, or was fortified by the same
Alesis, But, at least, itis some consolation
to the survivor that neither, to the very last
Thour, eased to respect the other, or to regard
‘him with sad indulgence.

‘The affection of thee two persons was as:
sailed by forees in comparison with which the
‘changes that health or fortune or place intro‘duce are ss nothing. Tt is a mournful stisiaeton, but yet a satistuction, that they were both
‘ofthem able to obey the law which says that tes
‘of close family relationship mast be honoured
snd sustained, Hed it not been so, this story
‘would never have been told,

‘The stroggle began soom yet of course
it didnot begin in early infaney. ‘Tut to
familistige my readers with the conditions of
‘the two persons (which were unusual) and
with the outlines oftheir temperaments (whieh
‘were, perhaps innately, antagonistic), it. is
needful to open with some account of all that
can truly and independently recollect as
well as with some statements which are, as
will be obvious, due to household tradition.

‘My parents were poor gentlefolks; not
young : solitary, sensitive and, although they
{id not know it, proud They both
to what is alled the Middle Clas, and there
was this further resemblance between them
‘hit they each descended from families which
had been more than vell-to-doin the eighteenth
century, and hd gradually sunken in frtane,
Tn both houses there had been » decay of
‘energy which had led to decay in wealth. In
the ease of my Father's fumily i had been «
slow decline; in thet of my Mother's it had
been rapid. My matemal grandlather was
‘born wealthy, and in the openiog yeas ofthe

ineteenth century, immediately after his
riage, he bought a little estate in North

 

 

 

 

 
‘Wales, on the slopes of Snowdon. Here he
seems to have lived in a pretentious way,
‘Keeping a pack of hounds and entertaining on
aan extravagant scale. He had a wile who
‘encouraged him in this vivid life, and three
children, my Mother and her two brothers
His best trait was his devotion to the
education of his children, in which he proclaimed himself a diseiple of Rousseau. Bu

hhe can hardly have followed the tenching of
“Emile” very closely, since he employed
tutors to teach his daughter, at an extremely
early age, the very subjects which Rousseau
forbade, such as history, literature and foreign
languages.

‘My Mother was his special fwvourite, and
his vanity did its best to make a blue-stocking
of her. She read Greek, Latin and even
litle Hebrew, and, what was more important,
her mind vas trained to be selfsupporting,
‘But she was diametrically opposed in essential
‘matters to her easy-going, luxurious and selfindulgent parents. Reviewing her life in her
‘thirtieth year, she remarked in some secret
notes: “ Feannotreellet the time when I did
not love religion.” She used « still more
remarkable expression: “IFT must date my
‘conversion from my frst wish and trial to be

 

  

 

 
aa

FATHER AND SON
holy, T may go buck to infancy; if Lam to
postpone it tll after my last wilful sin, itis
Searely yet begun.” ‘The iregular pleasures
ff her parents life were deeply distastefl to
he, as such were to many young persons in
those days of the wide revival of Conseience,
fand when my grandfather, by his serkless
expenditure, which he never checked til ruin
‘was upon hin, was obliged to sell his state,
and live in penury, my Mother was the only
‘member of the family who did not regret the
change. For my own part, [believe I should
have liked my reprobate maternal grandfather,
Tut his conduct was certainly very vexatious,
He dled, in his eightich year, when Iwas
nine months od.

Tt was a curious coincidence that life bad
brought both my parents along similar paths
to an almost identical position in sespest to
religious belie, She had started from the
“Anglican stand-point, he from the Wesleyan,
‘and each, almost without counsel fom others,
land after varied theological experiments, nd
come t0 take up precisely the same attitude
towards all divisions of the Protestant Church,
thet, namely, of detached and unbiased con:
‘emplation. So far as the sets agreed with
ry Father and my Mother, the sects were

 
FATHER AND SON
walking in the light; wherever they differed
from them, they: id slipped more or less
Aefinitely into a penumbra of their own
making, a darkness into which neither of my
purents would follow them. Hence, by a
process of selection, my Father and my Mother
alike had gradually, without violence, found
‘themselves shut oatside all Protestant com‘unions, and at Int they met only with x few
‘extreme Calvinists like themselves, on terms
‘of what may almost be called negation—with
no priest, no ritual, no festivals, no ornament of
any kind, nothing but the Lord's Supper and
the exposition of Holy Seripture drawing these
‘austere spirits into any sort of eobesion. They
called themselves “the Brethren,” simply ; a
title enlarged by the world outside into
“Plymouth Brethren,’

‘E was accident and'similaity which brought
my parents together at these meetings of the
‘rethren. Each was lonely, each was poo
‘each was accustomed toa strenuous intellectual
selésupport. THe was nearly thist-cight, she
‘was past forty-two, when they married. From
‘ suburban lodging, he brought her home to
this mother’s little hoase in the north-east ot
London without single day’s honeymoon
My Father was « zoologist, and a writer of

  

 

 

 
 

FATHER AND SON

 

was a writer,
volumes of ‘religious verse—the earlier of
‘whieh, I know not how, must have enjoyed
ome slight suoves, since second edition was
printed—afterwards she devoted her pen to
popular works of edifestion. But how infnitely removed in their sims, theirhabit, their
ambitions from “literary " people ofthe present
_fisy, words are senteely adequate to describe,
‘Neitherknewnor eared about any manifestation
of current literature. For ach there been
no poet Inter than Byron, and neither had read
‘romance since, in childhood, they had dipped
Into the Waverley Novels as they appeared in
secession. For etch the various forms_of
imaginative snd scientific erature were
merely means of improvement and profit,
‘which kept the student “out of the world.”
‘gave him fll employment, nd enabled him to
maintain himself. But pleasure was found
nowhere but in the Word of God, and to the
endless diseussion of the Scriptutes euch
Inuried when the day’s work was over.

(/n this strange household the advent of
{evita was not welcomed, but was bore with
{[resgaation. ‘The event was thus recorded
‘ay Father's diary +

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON

““, delivered of s son. Received green
swallow from Jamaica.”

‘This entry as caused amusement, as
shoving that he was s much interested in the
bird as in the boy. But this does not fellow ;
what the wording exemplifies is my Fathers
extreme punctiio. ‘The green swallow arived
later in the day than the son, and the eatlier
visitor was therefore recorded fist; my Father
ims serupuls in every species of range

‘Long afterwards, my Father told me that
‘my Mother suffered much in giving birth to
‘me, and that, uttering no ery, I appeared to be
ead. 1 was lid, with scant care, on another
bed in the room, while all anxiety and atten
tom were concentrated on my Mother. An
ld woman who happened to be there, and who
‘was unemployed, tured her thoughts to me,
tnd tried to awake in me «spark of vitality.
She succeeded, and she was afterwards com=
plimented by’ the doctor on her cleverness.
‘My Father could not—when he told me the
story—recollect the name of my preserver.
‘have often longed to know whoshe was. For
all the raptare of lie, for all its turmoil, its
anxious desires, its ‘manifold pleasures, and |
‘even for its sorrow and suffering, 1 bless and |

 
FATHER AND SON
praise that anonymous old lady from the
bottom of my heart.

Tt was six weeks before my Mother was
able to leave her room. The occasion was
made a solemn one, and was attended by a
species of Churching. Mr. Balfour, an aged
minister of the denomination, held private
service in the parlour, and * prayed for our
child, that he may be the Lord” ‘This was
‘the opening aet of Unt“ dedication” which
was never henceforward forgotten, and of
‘which the following pages will endeavour to
Aescribe the results, Around my tender and
‘unconscious piri was flung the luminous web,
the light and elastic but impermeable vel,
‘whieh twas hoped would keep me unspotted
from the worl.”

Until this time my Father's mother had
lived in the house and taken the domestic
‘charges of it on her own shoulders, She now
consented to leave us to ourselves. ‘There ie
‘no question that her exodus was a reli to
‘my Mother, since my piteral grandmother
‘was a strong and masterful women, buxom,
‘holerie and practical, for whom the interests
fof the mind did not exist.” Her daughter-inJaye, gentle as she was, and ethereal in manner
and ‘appearancestrangely contmasted (20

   

 
FATHER AND SON
doubt, in her tinctures of gold hair and white
skin, with my grandmother's bold carnations
and black tresses—was yet possessed of « will
like tempered steel. "They were better fiends
apart, with my Grandmother lodged hard by,
in a bright room, her household. gods and
bite of excellent cightecnth-eentury furniture
around her, er ministares and sparkling china
arranged on shelves.

Left to my Mothers solecare, I became the
centre of her solitude, Dut there mingled
with those happy animal instincts which
sustain the strength and patience of every
hhuman mother, and were fully present with
Ther—there mingled with these certain spiritual
determinations which ean be but rare, They
are, in their outline, 1 suppose, vaguely
‘common to many religious mothers, but there
‘ve few indeed who fll up the sketch with #0
firm a detail as she did. Once agein I am
indebted to her secret notes, in «little
locked volume, seen until now, neatly sixty
years later, by no eye save her own.” Thus
She wrote when I was twro months old

 

 

 

 

 

 

We have given him to the Lord; and we
trast that He wil really manifest him to be
His own, if he grow up and ifthe Lord take

 
FATHER AND SON
him early, we wil not doubt tht he is taken
to Himself, Only, if it please the Lord to
take him, T'do trust we may be spared secing
him suffering in lingering illness and much pain.
‘But in this asin all things His willis better
than what we ean choose. Whether his life
be prolonged or not, it has already been a
blessing tous, and to the saints in leading us to
‘much prayer, and bringing us into varied need
‘and some tral.”

 

 

 

"The last sentence is somewhat obscure to
‘me. How, at that tender age, [contrived to
be a blessing “to the suints” may surprise
‘others snd putes myself. But "the sits”
‘was the habitual term by which were indented
the fiends who met on Sunday mornings for
Holy Communion, and at many other times
in the week for prayer and discussion of
the Seriptures, in the small hired hall at
Hackney, which my parents attended. 1
suppose that the solema dedication of me to
the Lord, which was repeated in pubic in my
‘Mothers arms, being by no means a usual or
familiar ceremony even among the Brethren,
created a certain curiosity and fervour in the
immediate services, or was imagined 40 to do
by the fond, partial heart of my Mother,

 

 
FATHER AND SON
She, however, who hd been so much isolated,
now made the eave of her child an excuse for
retiring sill further into silence, With those
religious persons who met at the Room, as the
‘modest. chapel was called, she had ttle
spiritual and no intellectual sympathy. She
noted

T do not think it would increase my
happiness to be in the midst of the saints at
Hackney. have made up my mind to give
‘myself up to Baby for the winter, and tonecept
tno invitations. ‘To go when I can to the
Sunday morning meetings and to vee my own
Mother."

 

 

"The monotony of her existence now became’
extreme, but she seems to have been happy.
Her days were spent in taking care of me, and
in directing one young servant. My Father
‘ras for ever in his stady, writing, drawing,
dissecting ; sitting, no doubt, a8 I grew afer.
wards accustomed. to see him, absolutely
motionless, with his eye glued to the mieroscope, for twenty minutes at «time. So the
agreater part of every week-day was spent, and
fon Sunday he usualy preached one, and sometimes two extempore sermons. His work-day
PATHER AND SON
labours were rewarded by the praise of the
Jeamed world, to which he was indifferent, but
by very little money, which he needed more.
For over three years after their mariage,
neither of my parents left London for a single
Alay, not being able to afford to travel. They
received seareey any visitors, never ate ameal
‘away from home, never spent an evening
in social intercourse abroad. At night they
Aiseussed theology, read aloud to one another,
for translated seientifie brochures from Freneh
for German, Tt sounds » terrible life of pres
sure and deprivation, and that it was physically
‘unwholesome there ean be no shadow of &
doubt. But their contentinent was complete
sand unfeigned. Inthe midst ofthis, materially,
‘the hardest moment of ther ives, when Twas
‘one year old and there was a question of ox
leaving London, my Mother recorded in her
secret notes

 

We are happy and contented, having all
things necdful and plesnt, and our present
habitation is hallowed by many sweet associa
tions. We have our howie to ourselves and
‘enjoy each other's society. Tf we more we
shallno longer be slone. ‘The situation may be
more favourable, however, for Buby, as being
FATHER AND SON
‘more in the country. I desire to have no
choioe in the matter, but as T know not what
would be forour good, and God knows, so T
‘desire to leave it with Him, and if i isnot
His will we should move, He will rsise objections and dificulties, and if it is His will He
‘wil make Henry (my Father) desirous and
anxious to take the step, and then, whatever
the result, let us leave all to Him and not
segrot it”

[No one who is acquxinted with the human
heart will mistake this attitude of resignation
for weakness of purpose. It was not poverty of
will it was abnegation, i was a voluntary act,
My Mother, undemeath an exquisite amenity
‘of manner, concealed a rigour of spiit which
‘took the form of constant self-denial. For it
to dawn upon her consciousness tht she wished
for something, was definitly to renounce that
‘wish, or, more exactly, to subject it in every
thing to what she conceived to be the will of
God.

‘This is perhaps th right moment for me to
say that at tis time, and indeed nti the hour
of her death, she exerised, without suspecting
it, a magnetic power over the will and nature
fof my Father. Both were strong, but my

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘Mother was unquestionably the stronger of the
twos it was her mind which gradually drew his
‘to take up certain definite positon and thise‘mained permanent although she, the cause oft,
wasearly removed, Hence while it war with my
Father that the long struggle which Ihave to
narrate took plac, behind my Father stood the
ethereal memory of my Mother's wil, guiding
him, pressing im, holding him to the unewer
ing purpose which she had formed and defined
And when the inevitable disruption came,
‘what was unspeale “ly painful was to realise
{Hat it wasnot fron. se, but from both parents
that the purpose ofthe child was separated.
‘My Mother was» Puritan in grain, and
never a word escaped her, nota phrase exists
in her diary, to. suggest that she had any
privations to put up with. She seemed strong
and well, and so did 1; the one of us who
Droke down was my Father. With his nttake
of acute nervous dyspepsia came an unexpected
‘small accession of money, and we wereable,in
ry third year, to take a holiday of neely ten
‘monthsin Devonshire. ‘The extreme seclusion,
the unbroken strain, were never repested, and
‘when we retumed to London, it was to contions of grester amenity and to les rigid
‘practice of" the world forgetting by the world

 
FATHER AND SON
forgot.” ‘That this relaxation was more rela‘ve than positive, and thet nothing ever really
‘tempted either of my parents from their cavern
in an intellectosl ‘Thebaid, my recollections
will amply prove. But each of them was
forced by sioumstances into a more or Tess
Public postion, and neither could any longer
‘ite ignore the world around.

Te isnot my business here to re-write the
Diographies of my parents. Each of them be‘ame, in a certain measure, celebrated, aud
‘each was the subject of ar dea of eontemporary discussion. Each “2 prominent before
the eyes of « public of his or her own, half a
century ago. It is because their minds were
vigorous and their accomplishments distin.
{gushed Ut the contrast between their 5
{hal point of view and the aspect of a similar
class of persons to-day i interesting and may,
Thope, be instructive. ut this i not another
‘memoir of public individuals, ech of whom
‘ns had more than one biographer. My serious
‘duty, as T venture to hold it, i other;

 

 

 

‘Thus men sy thee, pase them, thought they knew
‘Ther in a ead poe them
Ot my owe el de ope
FATHER AND SON
But this is a diferent inspection, this is
study of
he others, he nore
YF Sse iver tights and darks undrenmed of,
the recon of a state of soul once not un‘common in Protestant Europe, of which my
prents were perhape the latest consistent ex
femplars among people of light and leading.
‘The peculiarities of « family life, founded
‘upon such prineiples are, in relation to a little
child, obvious; but I may be permitted to re‘capitulate them. Here. was perfect. purity,
perfect intrepidity- perfect sbnegation ; yet
‘ere was also nurowness isolation, an absence
‘of perspective, let it be boldly admitted, an
VVabsence of humanity. And there was
\yeatious mixture ofhumbleness and arrogance
‘entire resignation to the will of God and not
Tess entire disdain of the judgment and
opinion of man, My patents founded every
“tion, every attitude, upon this interpretation
‘of the Seriptures, and upon the guidance of
‘the Divine Will as revealed to them by direct
‘answer to prayer. The ejaculation in the
| thee ot ny dilemma was, * Let uscastit before
‘\the Lora”
So confident were they ofthe reality oftheir
intercourse with God, that they asked for no

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
other guide. ‘They recognised no spiritual
authority among men, they subjected themselves to no priest or minister, they troubled
their consciences about no current manifestaton of religious opinion.” ‘They lived in an
intellectual ell, hounded at its sides by the
walls of their own house, but open above to
‘the very heart of the uttermost heavens

"This, then, was the seene in which the soul
of a litle child was planted, not as in an
ordinary open flower border or carefully ended
social parerre, but as on a ledge, spit in the
‘granite of some mountiin. ‘The ledge was
hong between night and the snows on one
band, nd the dizay depths of the world upon
‘the other; was furnished with just soil enough
fora gentian to struggle skyiwards and open
its stiff are stars; and offered no lodgment,
rho hope of salvation, to any rootlet which
should stray beyond its inexorable limits

 
CHAPTER 11

cr of the darkness of my infaney there comes
only one flash of memory. T amseated alone,
in my baby-chair, at  dinner-table set for
several people. Somebody brings in leg of
‘mutton, putsit down close to me, and goes out.
Tam again alone, gazing at two low windows,
‘wide open upon s garden. Suddenly, noe
lessly, a large, long animal (obviously & grey‘hound) appears at one windowsill, slips into
‘the room, seizes the leg of mutton and slips
‘out again. When this happened I could not
‘yet talk, ‘The ccomplishment ofspeech eume
to me very Inte, doubtless beesnse T never
heard young voices. Many yeas later, when
mentioned this recollection, there was a shout
of langhter and surprise -—

‘That, then, was what became of the
mutton!" Tt was not you, who, as your Uncle
‘A. pretended, ae it up, in the twinkling of an
eye, bone and all!

 
FATHER AND SON
1 suppose that it was the starting intensity
of this incident which stamped it upon a
‘memory from ‘which all other impressions of
this early date have vanished.
‘Theadventureof the leg of mutton oceurred,
ceridently, at the house of my Mothers
brothers, for my parents, at this date, visited
no other. My uncles were not religious men,
but they had an almost filial respect for my
Mother, who was several years senior to the
elder of them. When the estastrophe of my
Grandfathers fortune had occurred, they bd
not yet left school. My Mother, in spite of
fn extreme dislike of teaching, which was
‘ative to her, immediately accepted the situa
tion of a governess in the family of an Trish
pobleman. The mansion was only to be
approached, as Miss Edgeworth would have
id, “through eighteen sloughs, at the
imminent pen of one’s lif,"and when one had
reached it, the mixture of opulence and squalfour, of evility and savagery, was unspeakable,
‘But my Mother was well pid, nd she stayed
in this distasteful envionment, doing the work
she hated most, while with the margin of her
salary she helped first one of hee brothers and
then the other through his Cambridge course
‘They studied ard snd did vell at the uni
9

 
FATHER AND SON
verity. At length their sister received, in her
lllina ‘Tle, news that her younger brother
Jad taken his degree, and then and ther, with
‘sigh of intense relict, she resigned her situa:
ton and came straight back to England.

Te is not to be wondered at, then, that my
‘uncles looked up to thie sister with feelings of
especial devotion. They were not inclined,
they were huedlyin a position, to erteise her
moves of thought. ‘They were easy-going,
tured and kindly gentlemen, rather limited in
their views, without a trace of their sisters
force of intellet or herstrenuous temper. B.
resembled her in person ; he was tall, fir, wi
auburn curls; he eultivated a certain tendency
tothe Byroni type fatal and melancholy. A.
‘was shot, brown and jose, with a pretension
to common sense; bluff and chatty. As «
Title child, T adored my Unele I, who sat
silent by the fireside, holding me sist his
nee, saying nothing, but looking unutterably
sd, and oceasonallyshakinghis warm-oloured
tresses, With great injustice, on the other
hand, I detested my Unele-A., beesuse he wed
to joke in armanner very displeasing tome, and
because he would so far forget himself as to
case, and even, it wil be eredted, to tickle
ime. My uncles, who remained bachelors to

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
the end of their lives, camed a comfortable
living, B. by teaching, A. as ‘something in
the City;" and they rented an old rambling
house in Clapton, that same in which saw
the greyhound. ‘Their house had a strange,
Aclcious smell, so unlike anything T smelt
fanywhere else, thst it used to fl myeyes with
tears of mysterious pleasure. I know now
‘at this was the odour of cigars, tbsceo being
‘species of incense tabooed at home on the
Iighest religious grounds.

Tt bas been recorded that Twas slow in
Jeaming to speak, T wed to be told that
having’ mot all invitations to repeat such
words as" Papa "and " Mamma” with gravity
tnd indifference, Lone day drew towards me
‘volume, and said “book” with startling
distinctness. I yas not at all precocious, but
st a rather early age, T thinke towards the
Ioeginning of my fourth year, I leamed to
ead. I cannot recollect atime when a
printed page of English was closed to me
Bat perhaps earlier still my Mother used to
repeat to me @ poem which I have always
taken for granted that she had herself com:
‘posed, « poem which had a romantic place i
‘my early mental history. Te ran ths, 1
‘think

 

   

 
FATHER AND SON
(pretty Moon, ou shies ight
Tipe Md Mama gels

‘Ad then i pany bs

‘And wath you nove above my end
‘Ab ther lod as de 300!
Bat es oe oo tse?
Farther you quicly come au
104 Gol, wy ha mer you shine

‘Long, long after the last line had become
sn anachronism, I used to shout this poem
from my bed before T went to sleep, whether
the night happened to be moonlit or no.

‘We must bave been my Father who taught
me my letters. To my Mother, as 1 have
sid, it was distasteful to teach, though she
was 30 prompt and skilful to lean. My
Father, on the contrary, taught cheerfully,
bby fits and starts. In particular, be had
4 scheme for rationalising geography, which I
‘think was admirable. T'was to climb upon a
chair, while, standing at my side, with a peneil
tnd sheet of paper, he was to’ draw a chart
of the markings on the earpet. Then, when T
‘understood the system, another chert on

 

 
FATHER AND SON
smaller sesle of the fumiture in the room,
then of floor of the house, then of the back:
‘garden, thon of a section of the street. ‘The
result ofthis was that geography eame to me
‘of itself as a perfectly natural miniature
arrangement of objects, and to this day bes
always been the seience which gives me least
<ificulty. My Father also taught me, the
simple roles of arithmetic, a litle natural —
history, and the elements of drawing; and he
Taboured long and unsuccessfully to make me
Team by heart hymns, palms and chapters of
Scripture, in which I always failed ignomink
‘ously and with tears. ‘This puraled and vexed
him, for he himself had an extremely retentive
textoal memory. He could not help thinking
that Twas naughty, and would not lex the
chapters, until at last he gave up the effort.
All this sketch of an education began, I believe,
jn my fourth yen, and was not advanced oF
‘modified during the'rest of my Mothers life.
‘Meanwhile, capable a5 I was of reading, I
found my greatest pleasure in the pages of.
ooks. ‘The range of these was limited, for
story-books of every description were sternly
fexeluded. No fiction of any Kind, religious
or secular, was admitted into the house. In
this it was to my Mother, not to my Father,

 
FATHER AND SON
thet the prohibition was due. She had
remarkable, I confess to me still somewhat
‘unseeountable impression, that to ‘tll a
story,” that is, to compose fictitious narrative
of any kind, was asin. She earied this eon

Yvietion to extreme lengths, My Father, in
Inter years, gave me some interesting examples
‘of her firmness. Asa young man in Amerie,
hae hd been deeply impressed by * Sulatie,
2 pious prose romance of thet then popular
‘writer, the Rev, Geonge Croly. When he
First met my Mother, he recommended it to
her, but she vould not consent to open it
‘Nor would she read the chivalrous tales in
verse of Sir Walter Seot, obstinaely alleging
that they were not “true.” She would read
none but Iyrial and subjective poetry. Her
secret dary reveals the history of this singular
version tothe Ftitious, although it emnot be
said toexplain the cause ofit. Asachild,howfever, she had possesed a passion for making
up stories, and so considerable a kil int that
she was constantly being begged to indulge
others with its exercise. But Twill, on 0
curious a point, leave her to. speak for
Dersel

 

 

 

© When I was «very little ebild, T used to
FATHER AND SON
amuse myself and my brothers with inventing
stories, such as Trend. Having, as T suppose,
‘naturally restless mind end busy imagination,
this soon became the chief pleasure of my life
Unfortunately, my brothers were always fond
‘of encouraging this propensity, and T found in
"Taylor, my maid, «still greater tempter. 1
thud not known there was any harm init, until
‘Miss Shore [a Calvinist governess), Sing it
ut, lectured me severely, and told me it was
‘wicked, From that time forth 1 considered
that to invent a story of any kind was asin.
But the desire to do so was too deeply rooted
in my aifections to be resisted in my own
strength (she was at that time nine years of
fage} and unfortunately T knew neither my
‘corruption nor my weakness, nor did I know
‘where to gain strength. ‘The longing to
invent stories grew with violence; everything
heard or read beeame food for my distemper.
"The simplicity of truth was not sufficient for
te; Imust needs embroider imaginetion upon
it, and the folly, vanity and wickedness which
disgraced my heart are more than Tam able
‘to express, Even now [at the age of twentytine}; tho! watched, prayed and striven against,
‘this is still the sin that most easily besets me.
It has hindered my prayers and prevented my

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘improvement, and therefore has humbled me
very much."

"This is, surely, avery painful instance of the
repression ofan instinct. There seems to have
‘been in this ease, a vocation such as is rarely
‘heard, and stil less often wilfully disregarded
and silenced. Was my Mother intended by
nature to be a novelist? Thave often thought
fo, and her talents and vigour of purpose,
Airected. slong the line which was ready to
form “the chief pleasure of her life,” could
hardly have fried to conduct her to. great
success, She was alitle younger than Bulwer
Lytton, a litle older than Mrs. Gaskell —but
‘hese are vain and trivial speculations!

‘My own state, however, was, [should think,
almost unique among the children of eultivated
parents. Inconsequence of thesteen ordinance
‘which T have desribed, not a single Retion
‘was read of told to me during my infkney.
‘The rapture of the child who delays the
process of going to bed by eajoling * «story
fut of his mother or his nurse, as he sits upon
her knee, well tucked up, at the eormer of the
nursery ‘Sre,—this was unknown to me
Never in all my early eildbood, did any one
‘address to me the affecting preamble, “Once
‘upon time!” Twas told about misionates,

 

  
FATHER AND SON

‘but never about pirates; T was familiar with
hhumming-bieds, but 1 had never heard of
fairies, Jack the Giant-Killr, Rurpestiliskin
snd Rabin Flood were not of my aequsintance,
and though T understood about wolves, Little
Red Ridinghood was a stranger even by name
So far as my “dediation” was concerned, 1
can but think that my parents were in error
thus to exclude the imaginary fom my
outlook upon fuets. ‘They desired to make
me truthful; the tendeney was to make me
positive and sceptical. Had they wrapped me
in the soft folds of supernatural fancy, my
‘ind might have been longer content to follow
their traditions in an unquestioning sprit.

“Having easly sad what, in those early years,
did not read, Ihave great difieulty in saying
what T did read, But queer variety of
natural history, some of it quite indigestible
by my undeveloped mind: many books of
‘travels, mainly ofa scientific character, among
‘them voyages of discovery in the South Seas,
by which my brain was dimly fled with
splendoar; some geography and astronomy,
both of them sincerely enjoyed; much
theology, which I desired to appreciate but
could never get my teeth into (fT may venture
to say s0), and over which my eye and tongue
FATHER AND SON
Teamed to slip without penetrating, so that
would read, and read aloud, and with great
propriety of emphasis, page after page without
having formed an idea or retained an expression,
‘There wa, for instance, writer on prophecy
called Jukes, of whose works each of my
‘pens was inordinately fond, and T was ely
Set to read Jokes aloud to them. “T did it
slibly, ike « machine, but the sight of Sukes's
Yolumes beesme an abomination to me, and 1
never formed the outline of « notion what
they were about. Later on, «publication
called “The Penny Cyclopedia" became my
daily, and for long time almost my sole
study; to the subject of this remarkable work
Timay presently return,

‘eis difeult to keep anything like chrono
logical onder in recording fragments of exely
recollection, and in speaking of my reading T
have been ied too far ahend. My memory
dots not, practically, bogin tll we returned
from certain visits, made with s zoologial
purpose, tothe shores of Devon and Dorset,
And settled, tly in my Bf year, in a house
‘At Islington, in the north of London. Our
Cireuanatances were now moreeasy; my Father
Jhad regular and well-psid literary work; and
the house was larger and more comfortable

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
than ever before, though still very simple and
restricted. “My memories, some of which are
exactly dated by certain facts, now become
‘lear and almost abundant. What I do not
remember, except from having it very often
repeated to me, is what may be considered the
‘only “clever” thing thet I said during an
otherwise unillstrious childhood. It was not
startlingly “clever” but it may pas. A lady
when 1 was just four—rather injudicioualy
showed me a large print ofa human skeleton,
saying “There! you don't know what that is,
do yout” Upon which, immediately and very
arcly, replied, Tsn'tita man with the mest
off” ‘This was thought wonderful, and, asit
{is supposed that I had never had the phenormenon explained to me, it certainly displays
some quickness in seiring an analogy. 1 had
‘often watched my Futher, while he soaked the
flesh off the bone of ses nd small mara,
TET venture to repeat this tif, i is only to
point out thatthe system on which [was being
‘educated deprived ll things, human lifeamong
therest,oftheirmystery. The *baregrinning
skeleton of death * wah to me merely a pre
‘pared specimen ofthat fentherlessplantigrade
‘ertebrate, homo sapiens.

“As Ihave suid Ut this ancedote was thought

  

 

 
FATHER AND SON
worth repeating, T ought to proceed to say
that there was 0 far as Tcan reollest none
ofthat flattery of childhood which iso often
merely a beckhaaded way of indulging the
vanity of parents. My Mother, indeed, would
hardly have Deen human if she hd not oc
sSlonaly entertained herself with the delasion
that her solitary duckling was a eygnet. ‘This
‘ny Futher didnot encourage, rearing, with
reat affection, snd chucking me under the
‘hin, that T yas “a nice litle ondinary boy.”
Dy Mother, sng by this want of eppreiation,
Yeould proceed 50 far as to delate thit she
Tetive Ut in fatore ies the FS. would
be chiely known at his sons father! (This x
2 plessanteyfequent in profesional familie)

"To ths my Father, whether convinced or
not, woul make no demir, and the couple
trould begin to isc, in ty presence, the
{etion which my shiing talents woud ake
In consequence of my dedication to “the
Lord's Service,” the range of posites was
uch restrict. My Father who had lived
Jong in the Tropes, and. who nursed « perpetal nostalgia for © the Ie lary ies where
The trumpetoreids blow,” leaned towards
the fed of missionary labour. My Mother,
‘who was cold about forcgn missions, preferred

 

 
FATHER AND SON
to beliove that T shouldbe the Charles Wesley
cof my age, “or perhaps,” she had the eandour
toadiit, ‘merely the George Whitetield” 1
‘eannot sewollect the time when T didnot
‘understand that L was going to be a minister
‘of the Gospel.

tis so generally taken for granted that
life stietly dedicated to religion is sti? and
dreary, that I may have some difleulty in
persuading my readers that, asa matter of fet,
in these early days of my. childhood, before
disease and death had penetrated to our
slender society, we were always cheerful and
‘often gay. My parents were playful with one
‘nother, and there were certain stock family
{ests which seldom fled to enliven the break
fast table, My Father and Mother lived 50
completely in the atmosphere of faith, and
‘were so utterly convinced of their intercourse
with God, that, so long as that intercourse
‘was not clouded by sin, to which they were
Aeliately sensitive, they could ard to take
‘the pissing hour very lightly. ‘They would
‘even, to a certain extent, treat the surround‘ngs of their religion asa subject of jest, joking
very mildly and gently about such things 28
fn attitude at prayer othe natire of a supplication, ‘They’ were absolutely indifferent to
FATHER AND SON
forms. ‘They prayed, seated in their chairs,
willingly as reversed, upon their knees; no
ritual having any sigificance for them. My
‘Mother was sometimes extremely gey,Inughfing with » soft, merry sound. What. have
since been told of the guleless mirth of nuns
in‘ convent has reminded me of the gaiety of
‘my parents during my ealy ehildhood.
Soong as I was a mere part of them,
without individual existence, and swept ot
4 satellite, in their stinospiere, I eas mirthfu
‘when they were mirthfol, and grave when
they were grave. ‘The mere fact that Thad
tno young companions, no story books, 10
‘outdoor amusements, none of the thousand
‘and one employments provided for other
ciléren in more conventional surroundings,
Aid not make me discontented or fretfl, befuse I did not know of the existence of
uch entertainments. Tn exchange, I beeame
keenly attentive to the limited crcl of intr
fits open to me. Oddly enough, 1 have no
recllection of ny curiosity about other ebil>
dren, nor of any desire to speak to them oF
play with them. ‘They did not enter into my
reams, which were occupied entirely with
‘grown-up people and animals 1 had three
dolls, to whom my attitude was not very

 

 
FATHER AND SON

inteligble. Two of these were female, one
‘with shapeles feo of rags, the other in wax.
‘But, in my fh year, when the Crimean Wat
‘broke out, Teas given a third doll, a soldier,
‘dressed very smartly in a searet eloth tunic.
Tused to put the dolls on three chairs, and
Iuarangue them aloud, but my sentiment to
‘them was never confidential, until our msidservant one day, intrading on my audience,
‘and misunderstanding the occasion of it, sid:
“What Ps boy, and. playing with a soldier
‘when he's got two lady-dolls to. play with #”
Thad never thought of my dolls as conidants
before, but from that time forth 1 paid a
special attention to the soldier, in order to
smake up to him for Liie’s unwarantable
insult.

‘The declarstion of war with Russia brought
the fist breath of outside lie into our Cale.
vinist cloister. My parents took in a daily
newspaper, which they had never done before,
and events in picturesque places, which my
Father and T looked ont on the mop, were
‘eagerly discussed, One of my vividest ealy
temaries ean be dated exactly. I was play
ing about the house, and suddenly burst into
the breakfist-oom, where, close to the docr,
satan ming gre, very tll young me,

 

 
PATHER AND SON
5 stiffs my doll, in a gorgeous seslt tunie.
Quite fr away rom him, at her writing table,
‘iy Mother sat with her Bible open before her,
snd was rging the gospel plan of salvation on
his acceptance. She promptly told me to run
swayand play.but Ud seen agrent sight. This
fguardsman was in the act of leaving for the
‘Crimea, and hisaventures,—he was converted
in consequence of my Mothers instruction.
were afterwards told by her in « tract, called
“The Guardsman of the lim” of which [
believe that more thn half million of copies
were circulated. He was killedin that battle,
‘and this added an extraordinary lustre to my
dream of hin. Tse im still in my mind's eye,
rg, still, and unspeakably brillant, seated,
from respect, as near as possible to our parlour
loot. ‘This sppatition gave reality to my subsequent conversations with the soldier doll.
‘That same vetory of the Alma, which was
reported in London on my fith birthday, is
also marked very clearly in my memory by a
family citeumstance. "We were seated at
breakfast, at our sinall round table drawn lowe
upto the window, my Father with his back to,
the light. Suddenly, he gave a sort of ery,
and read out the opening sentences from the
Times announcing a battle in the valley

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘of the Alma. No doube the strain of national
anxiety had been very great, for both he and
mmy Mother semed deeply excited. He broke
‘olf his reading when the fit of the decisive
Victory was assured, and he and my Mother
sank simultaneously on their knees in front of
their ten and bread-and-butter, while in & loud
voice my Father gave thanks to the God of
Battles,” This patriotism was the more rermarkable, in that he had schooled himself, as
hh believed, to put his heavenly citizenship"
above all earthly duties. To those who said:
“Because you are a Christian, surly you are
not less an Englishman 1” he would reply by
shaking his Head, and by saying: “Tam a
citizen of no earthly State.” Hle did not realJno that, in realty, and to use a cant phrase
not yet coined in 1856, there existed in Great
ritkin no more thorough * Jingo than he.
‘Another instance of the remarkable way in
which the interests of daily life were mingled,
in our strange household, with the practice of
‘religion, made an impression upon my memory.
Werhad all three been much excited by a report that a certin disk geometer- moth, gen
fated in underground stables, had been met
with in Islington. ts mame, 1 tink is bole
abi fuliginaria, and 1 believe that it is

 

 
_ Whi

FATHER AND SON
excessively rare in England. We were sitting
at family prayers, on a summer moming, 1
thin in 1855, when through the open window
brown moth came sailing, My Mother
immediately interupted the reading of the
Bible by saying to my Father, “O1” Henry,
do you think that can be Boletobia 2?” My
‘Father rose up fom the sated book, examined
theinsect, which had now perehed, and replied:
“'No itis only the common Vapourer, orci
antigua”, resuming his seat, and the expos
tion of the Word, without any apology oF
embarrassment.

Tn the course of this, my sixth year, there
Iappened series of minute and’ soundless
incidents which, elementary a they may seem,
‘when told, were seeond in real importance to
none in my mental history. The recollection
fof them confinms me in the opinion that
certain leading features in each human soul
fare inherent to it, and exnnot be accounted for
hy suggestion or training, In my ovn case,
1 was most earefully withdrawn, ike Princess
Blanchetleur in her marble fortress, rom every
‘outside influence whatever, yet to me the
instinctive life came as unexpectedly as her
lover came to her in the basket of roses,

feme to me was the consciousness of
6

 

 
FATHER AND SON
selfs force andas x companion, andit came
‘as the result of one or two shocks, whieh Twill
relate

Th consequence of hearing so much about an
Oniniscient God, « being of supemnatral wis
om and penetration who was always with us,
who made, in fact, «fourth in our company, I
had come to think of Him, not without awe,
but with absolute confidence. My Father and
Mother, in ther serene disipline of me, never
argued with one another, never even differed;
their wills seemed absolutely one. My Mother
always deferred tomy Father, and in his ab‘sence spoke of him to me,asithe were all-wise.
Teonfused him in some sense with God; at all
events I helieved that my Father knew everything and saw everything. One moraing in
my sixth year, my Mother and I were slone
jn themorning room, when my Father eae in
‘andannounced some fact tous. Twas standing
fn the rug, gasing at him, and when he made
this statement, T remember turing quickly,
fn embsrrassment, and looking into the fire.
"The shock to me was as that of a thunderbolt,
for what my Father had said was not rue. My
Mother and 1, who had heen present at the
‘ailing incident, were aware that it had not
Iuppened exactly’ as it had been reported to

 
FATHER AND SON
him. My Mother gently told him so, and he
accepted” the cometion, Nothing could
possibly have boon more ting tomy parents,
brut to me it meant an epoch, Here was the
appalling dacovery, never susposted before,
tht my Father ws not as God, and did not
now everything. The shock was not caused
hy any suspicion that he was not telling the
truth a i appre to hit, but. bythe afl
proof Ut he was not, a Thad supposed,

"This experience wes followed by another,
‘which cootimed the fist, but ctried me
reat deal further, In our little back-garden,
iy Father had built up a rockery for fers
fd moses, and fom the weter-upply of the
Senee he bea Ghorace xtes tees oy Get
Pierced upwards, through the’ rockery and
Produced, when tap was tured, a pretty
Slvery.parsol of water, The pipe was
txpostd somewhere “neat the foot af the
rockery. "One day, two workmen, who were
Going some repin Jefe thelr tools during the
tinmer hour in the back garden, end as {was
marching about I suddenly thought that to
tee whether one of thee tools could make
hole in the pipe would be attractive. Tt aid
‘make sich a hole, quite easy and thea the

 

 
FATHER AND SON
matter eseaped my mind. But « day or two
afterwards, when my Father came in to dinner,
Ihe was very angry. He hud timed the tap,
and instead of the fountain arching at the
Summit, there ad been a rush of water
trough a hole atthe foot. ‘The rockery was
absolutely ruined.

(Of course I realised in a moment what 1
nnd done, snd Isat fren with alarm, iting
tobe denounced. But my Mother remarked
fon the visit ofthe plumbers two or three days
Defore, and my Father instantly took up the
suggestion: No doubt that was it; the
tmischievous fellows had thought it amusing
to stab the pipe and spoil the fountain. No
suspieion fel on me; no question was asked
of me. I sat there, tuned to stone within,
Dut outwardly sympathetic and with unchecked appetite

We attribute, I believe, too many’ moral
ideas to little children. It is obvious that in
this tremendous juncture, T ought to have
been urged forward by good instincts, or held
back by naughty-oues. ut 1 am surethat the

 

   

 

 
FATHER AND SON
the destruction of the fountain, I was soory
about that, for my own sake, since T admired
the skipping water extremely, and had had no
idea that 1 was spoiling its display. But the
mations which nov thronged within me, and
‘hich led me with an almost unvtisealarity,
to seek solitude in the buek-garden, were not
‘moral at all, they were intelletusl. 1 was
not ashamed of having successfully and 30
surprisingly —deeeived my parents by my
ceily silences T looked upon that as a
providential eseape, and dismissed all further
hough of iT had other things to think of,
Inthe fist place, the theory thet my Father
‘was omniscient or infallible was now dead and
buried. “He probably knew very little in this
‘ease he had not knows a fact of sich importance thet if you did not Imow that, it
‘could hardly matter what you knew. My
Father, as a deity, as a natural force of
ee
level. In future, his statements about:
in general neal not be accepted imply.
Bt ofall the thovghts which rushed upon my
savage and undeveloped litle brain at. this
crisis, the most curious was that I had found |
‘© companion and a confidant. in myself, |
‘There was sooret in this world and it

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
belonged to me and to somebody who lived
inthe sume body with me. ‘There were two
‘of us and we could talk with one another. Tt
is diffealt to define impressions so. di
‘mentary, but its certain that it was inthis
nl form that the sense of my individuality
now suddenly descended upon me, and itis
squally certain that twas a great solace to me
tw find « sympathiser in my own breast.
‘About this time, my Mother, caried away
by the current of her literary and her philan
theopie work, left me more and more to my
fown devices, She was seized with a great
enthusiasm; as one of her admirers and
disciples hes written, she went on her way,
sowing beside all water." 1 would not for
1 moment let it be supposed that. regard
hher as Mrs, Jellyby, or that I thinke she
‘neglected me. But s remarkable work had
‘opened up beforeher afterher long years in a
‘mental hermitage, she was drawn forth into the
lamorous harvest feld of souls. Shedeveloped
an unexpected gift of persuasion over strangers
whom she met in the omnibus or in the tran,
nd with whom she courageously grappled. ‘This
Fegan by her noting, with deep humility and
Joy, that “T have reason to judge the sound
fonversion to God of three young pesons

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘within afew weeks, by the instrumentality of
‘myconversationswith them.” At thesame time,
as another of her biographers has sad,“ those
‘ustimonies to the Blood of Christ, the feuits
fof her pen, began to be spread very widely,
feven to the most distant parts of the globe.”
‘My Father, too, was at this time atthe height
of his activity. "After breakfast, each of them
‘was amply occupied, perlaps until night fl.
‘our evenings we still always spent together,
Sometimes my Mother took me with her on
her “unknown day's employ”; T recollect
pleasant rambles through the City by her side,
And the act of looking up at her figure soaring
sbove me. But when all was done, Thad
hours snd hours of complete slitude, in my
Pathersstudy, inthe buckyurden, above all in
the garnet.

‘The garet was a fury place. Te was low
Tean-toy lighted from the root. Tt was wholly
unfurnished, except for two objects, an ancient
hhat-ox and a still more ancient skin-teu
‘The hat-hox passed me extremely, til one
day, asking my Father what it was, T got a
distracted answer which led me to believe that
it was itself a sort of hat, and T made a
Inborious but repented ert to wear it.The
skin-trunke was absolutely empty, but. the

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Inside ofthe fd of it was lined with shects of
‘what I now know to have been # sensational
novel. It was, of course, © fragment, but 1
red it, kneeling on the bare floor, with indeseribable rapture. It will be recollected that
the idea of fiction, of « deliberately invented
story, lad been kept fom me vith entire
Success. I therefore implicitly believed the
tale in the lid of the trunk to be a true
count of the sortows of lady of tile, who
hha to fle the country, and who was pursued
into foreign lands by enemies bent upon her
ruin, Somebody had an interview with a
“minion” in-a * mask"; I went downstairs
and looked up these words in Bailey's“ English
Dictionary.” but was let in darkness a to
‘what they had to do with the lady of tile
"This ridialous feagment led me with
Aelicious fenes; 1 fancied that my Mother,
‘who was out so much, might be threatened by
Alanger of the same sort: and the fact that
the narrative came abruptly to an end, in the
Iie of one of its most thrilling sentences,
‘wound me up almost to disorder of wonder
sd romance

"The preoccupation of my parents threw me
more ad more upon my own resourees, Dut
hat are the reourees of a solitary child of

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Sixt 1 was never inclined to make fiends
with servants, nor did our successive maids
proffer, so far as 1 recollect, any advances.
Perhaps, with my “dediestion” and my
‘grown-up ways of talking, did not seem to
‘them at all an attractive little boy. —T eon:
tinved to ave no. companions, or even
qusintances of my own age. Tam unable to
recollect exchanging two words with another
child tl ater my Mothers death.
‘The abundant energy which my Mother now
into her publie work did not affect the
4quietude of our private life. We had some
Visitors in the day-time, people who eame to
consult one parent or the other. Bat they
never stayed to « meal, and we never retumed
their visits. Ido not quite know how it yas
‘hat nether of my parents took me to any of
the sights of London, although T am sure it
‘was a question of principle with them, Not
withstanding all our study of natural history,
Teas never introduoed to live wild beasts at
the Zoo, nor to dead ones at the Dritish
Museum, Tean understand better why we
never Visited a picture gallery or a concer
room, So far as T ean recolest, the only
time I was ever taken to any place of enter
tainment was when my Father and 1 paid

 

 

 

  

 
FATHER AND SON
visit, long anticipated, to the Great Globe
in Leicester Square. ‘This was « huge struc‘tue, the interior of which one ascended by
‘means of a spiral staircase. It was poor
‘affairs that as concave in it whieh should
have been convex, and my imagination was
deeply allonted. I could invent a far better
Great Globe than that in my mind's eye in
the garret,

‘Being so restricted, then, and yet so active,
‘my mind took reluge in an infantile species of
natural magic, This contended with the
definite ideas of religion which my parents
‘ere continuing, with too mechanial  persisteney, to force into my nature, and it ran
parallel with them. T formed strange superStitions, which 1 can only render intelligible
bby naming some concrete examples. I perssaded myself that, if 1 could only discover
‘the proper words to say or the proper passes
‘to make, I could induce the gorgeous birds
and butterflies in -my Father's ilustrated
‘manuals to come to life, and fy out of the
book; leaving holes behind them. T believed
that, when, at the Chapel, we sang, drearly
‘and slowly, loud hymns of experience and
‘humiliation, 1 gould boom forth with » sound
equal to that of dozens of singers, ifT could

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
only hit upon the formula. During morning
and evening peayers, which were extremely
lengthy and fatiguing, T fancied that one of
my two[selves could At up, and sit elinging to
‘the comice, and look down on miy other self
and the rest of us, iT could only find the key.
Taboured for hours in search of these formu,
thinking to compass my ends by means
absolutely irrational. For example, Twas
‘convinced thatf [could only count consecutive
numbers long enough, without losing one, 1
should suddenly, on reching some far-distant
figure, find myself in possession of the great
secret. I feel quite sure thet nothing extemal
suggested these ideas of magi, and 1 think it
probable that they spproached the ideas of
Savages at « very eur stage of development.
‘AI this ferment’ of tind was ‘entirely
unobserved by my parents. But when 1
formed the belief that it was necesary, for
the success of my practical magic, that 1
should hurt myself and when, as 8 matter of
thet, I begun, in extreme seerecy, to run pins
into my flesh and bang my joints with books,
rho one will be surprised to hear that. my
‘Mother's attention ws drawn to the fet that
| waslooking delicate”. The notice nowadays
tunivenally given to the hygienic rules of life
rr
FATHER AND SON
was rare fifty years ago, and among deeply
religious people, in particular, ftalistic views
of disease prevailed, If any’ one was il, it
showed that “the Lord's hand was extended
‘in ehastisement.” and much prayer was poured
forth in order that it might be explsined to
the sufferer, oF to his relations in what be or
‘they had sinned. People would, for instance,
go on living over a ces-pool, working. them.
Selves up into an agony to discover how they
hud incurred the displeasure of the Lord, but
never moving away. As I beeume very pale
and nervous, and slept badly at nights, with
visions and loud sereams in my sleep, {was
taken to « physician, who stripped me and
tapped me all over (this gave me some valuable
Ihints for my magical practices), but could find
nothing the matter. He recommended,
whatever physicians in such eases always
recommend,—but nothing was done If
was feeble it was the Lord's Will, and we
‘must acquiesce,

Tt culminated in» sort of fit of hysterics,
when T lost all self-control, and sobted with
fears, and banged my head on the table.
‘While this was proceeding, I was conscious of
that dual individuality of which Ihave already +
spoken, sine while one part of me gave way,

 

 

   

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
and could not resist, the other part in some
extraordinary sense’ seemed standing aloof,
‘much impresed. Twas alone with my Futher
‘when this ersis suddenly occurred, and T was
interested to see that he was greatly slarmed,
Te-was a very long time since we had spent a
ay out of London, and I sud, on being
oaxed buck to calmness, that T wanted * to
‘ointo the country.” Like the dying Falta,
Thabbled of groen feds. My Father, after a
litle reflection, proposed to take “me to
Primyose Hil. "Thad never heard ofthe place,
land names have always appealed directly to
‘my imagination, T'was in the highest degree
delighted, and could hardly restrain my
impatience. As soon as posible we set forth
‘westward, my band in my Father's with the
liveliest anticipations. I expected’ to see a
‘mountain absolutely carpeted with primeoses,
4 terrestrial galaxy like that which eovered
‘the hill that led up to Montgomery Castle in
‘Donne's poem. But at length, as we walled
‘rom the Chalk Farm direction, « miserable
acelivty stole into view~surrounded, even in
‘those days, on most sides by houses, with its
‘grass worn to the bulf by millions of boots,
tnd resembling what I meant bythe county”
‘about as much as Poplar resembles Paradise,

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
We sat down on a bench at its ingloriows
summit, whereupon I burst into tears, and in
‘heart-rending whisper sobbed, Oh Papa
Jet us go home!”

"This was the Inchrymose epoch in a curse
not otherwise given to weeping, for T must tell
‘one more tale of tears, About this time,—the
‘automn of 1858,—my parents were disturbed
‘more than once in the twilight, after Thad
hoon put to bed, by shrieks from my eri.

hey would rash’ up to my side, and find me
in great distess, but would be unable to dis.
‘over the cause of it The fact was that 1
‘was half beside myself with ghostly fear

nereased and pointed by the fact that there
Thad been some daring burglaries in our street,
‘Our servant-maid, who slept at the top of the
house, had seen, of thought she saw, upon a
‘moonlight night, the figure of erouching man,
silhouetted wgainst the sky, slip down from
the roof ani leap into her’ room, She
screamed, and he fled away. Moreover, as if
this were not enough for my tender nerves,
there had been committed a horrid murder, at
‘baker's shop just round the commer in the
Caledonian Hod, to which murder actuality
was given to us by the fact that my Mother
hha been“ just thinking” of geting her breed

 
FATHER AND SON
from this shop. Children, think, were not
spared the details of these alfirs Ay yeurs
go at less, L wens not, and my nerves were
‘packet of splikins.

Hut what made me seream o! nights, was
‘that when my Mother had tucked me up in
Fred, asd had heard me say my praver, and
thud ‘prayed aloud on her knees st my se, and
Ind ‘stolen downstairs, noises immediately
‘began inthe room. ‘There wes « rustling of
clothes, and a slapping of bands, and 1 gur
ing, and a sniffing, and a trotting, ‘These
Horrible mufled sounds would goon, and die
samay, and he resumed; T would pray very
fervently toGod to save me fom my enemies
and sometimes I would goto sleep. But on
other ocrasions, my faith and fortitude alike
gave way, and I screamed Mama! Maina”
‘Then would my parents come bounding up
the stairs, and comfort me, and kiss me, and
ssoure me it was nothing, And nothing it
‘was while they were there, but no sooner fad
they gone than the ghostly rot recommenced
Teas at last discovered by my Mother that
the whole mischief was due ta card of framed
texts, fastened by one nil to the walls thisdid
nothing when the bed-room door was shut, but
‘when it was left open jin oder that my parents

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
might hear me eal), the eard began to gallop
inthe draught, and made the most intolerable
Several things tended at this time to alien
ste my conscience from the line which my
Rather bad so rigidly traced for it.The ques.
tion oftheeflicacy of prayer, which has puzaled
wiser hetds than mine was, began to trouble
Ime. 1 ws insisted on in our household that
iftanything was desired, you should not, as my
Mother said lose anytime in seking for it
Dut ask God to guide you to it” In many
Jumetares of lie, this is precisely what, in st
thet, they did, Twill not dwell here on theit
theories, which my Mother put forth, with
inching direetnes, in her published writings. But found that a diference was made
between my privileges in this matter and
‘theirs, and this led to many discussions. My
parentesaid = Whatever you need, tll Him
‘and He will grant it, fit is His will” Very
wall; I had need ofa large painted humming
top which I had seen in &shop-window in the
Caledonian Road. Accordingly, T introduced
4 supplication for this object into my evening
‘prayer, entefully adding the words : If it is
‘Thy wil” This, I recollect, placed my Mother
Jina dilemms, and she consulted my Father.

 

 

 

 

   

 

 
FATHER AND SON
"Taken, I suppose, at a disadvantage, my Father
told me T must not pray for * things like
‘that:"” ‘To-which Lanswered by another query,
“Why? And I added that he ssid we
‘ought to pray for things we neaded, and that
{needed the humming-top «great deal more
than T did the conversion of the heathen of
the restitution of Jerusalem to the Jews, two
‘objects of my nighily supplication which left
me very eo

have reason to believe, ooking back upon
this scene, conducted by eandledight in the
front parlour, that my Mother was much
bafled by the logic of my argument. She
ud gone so fir as to say publicly that no
‘things or eitcumstances are too insignificant
to bring before the God of the whole earth.”
1 persisted that this covered the ease of the
hhumming-top, which was extremely significant
tome. [noticed that she held aloof from the
discussion, which was earsied on with some
show of annoyance by my Father, He had
never gone quite so far as she did in regard
‘this question of praying for material thingy
Tam not sure that she was convinced thet T
‘ought to have been checked; but he eould not
hhlp seeing that it redueed their favourite
theory to an absurdity for a small child to

a

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘exercise the privilege. He ceased to argue,
and told me peremptorily that it was not
ight for me to pray for thing like humming
tops, and thst I must do it no more. His
authority, of course, was paramount, and T
‘yielded; but my futh in the efieaey of prayer
‘was # good deal shaken. The fhtal suspicion
Ind crossed my mind thet the reason why T
‘was not to pray forthe top was becauseit was
too expensive for my parents to buy, that
Iocing the usual excuse for not geting things
T wished for.

Twas about the date of my sixth birthday
‘that Tid something very naughty, some act
of direct disabedience, for which my Father,
falter # solemn sermon, chastised me, sacriScilly by giving me several cuts with «cane.
"This action was justified, as everything he did
‘was justified, by reference to Seripture Spare
the tod and spoil the child” T suppose that
there are some children, of a sllen and lyme
phatic temperament, who are smartened up
find made more wide-awake by a. whipping
Teislangely a matter of convention, the exereise
being endured (I am told) with pride by the
infnts of our atistocrsey, but not tolerated by
the lower clases, Lam affaid thet 1 proved
‘my inherent vulgarity by being made, not

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘contrite or humble, but furiously angry by this
caning, T cannot’ account for the flame of
tage which it awakened in my bosom. My
ear, excellent Father had beaten me, not very
severely, without il-temper, nd with the most
genuine desire to improve me, But he was
rot welladvised, especially s0. far as the
“dedication to the Lord's service” was
ceoncemed. This same “dedication” nd
‘ministered to my vanity, and there are some
fnatures which are not improved by being
husniliated, I have to confess with shame
that T went about the house for some days
with a murderous hatred of my Father locked
‘within my bosom. He did not suspect that
the chastisement had not been wholly eli
sous, and he hore me no malice; so that afer
Awhile, I forgot and thus forgave him. Bt
1 do not regard physical punishment asa wise
clement inthe education of proud und sensitive
cdildren,

My theological misdeeds culminated, how‘ever, in an act so pele and preposterous that
T should not venture to record iti it did. not
throw some glimmering of ight on the subjest
which T have proposed to. myself in waiting
these pages. My mind continued to dwell on
the mysterious question of prayer. Tt pusaled

 

 

 

 

 

 
~ FATHER AND SON
ime greatly to know why, if we were God's
children, and if he was watching over us by

it and day, we might not supplicate for
toys snd sweets and smaet clothes as well as
for the conversion of the heathen. Just at this
jinetur, we had a special service atthe Room,
‘at which our attention was particularly called
‘to what we always spoke of as “the field of
missionary labour,” ‘The Bast was represented
among “the saints” by an excellent Irish pees,
‘who lid, in his early youth, converted and
tarzied « lady of colour; this Asiatic shared
in our Sunday morning meetings, and was
fan object of helpless terror to me; T shrank
from her amie eareses, and vaguely ident
fied her with « personage much spoken of in
‘ut faily cizele, the “ Personal Devil”

‘All these matters drew my thoughts to the
subject ofidolatry, which was severely censured
tthe missionary mecting, T cros-examined
ty Father very closely as to the nature of
this sin, and pinned him down to the eategorical statement that idolatry consisted in
praying to any one or anything but God
Hime. Wood and stone, in the words of
the hymn, sere peculiarly liable to be bowed
down to by the heathen in thir blindness. 1
‘presied my Father further on this subject, and

 

   

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
the assured me that God would be very angry,
and would signify His anger, if any one, in 8
Christian country, owed down to ood and
stone. T eannot recall why T was #0 pertinacious on this subject, but {remember that my
Father became a litte restive under my eros
‘examination, T determined, however, to test
‘the matter for myself, and one morning, wen
‘oth my parents were safely out of the house,
prepared for the great act of heresy. Twas
in the moming-room on the ground-floor,
‘where, with much labour, I hoisted small
chair on to the table close tothe window. My
heart was now beating sift would leap out
cof my sie, but I pursued my experiment. 1
‘enlt down on the enrpet in front of the table
nd looking up I ssid my daly prayer ina loud
‘oie, only substituting the address “O Chair!

for the abitaal one,

Having caried this act of idolatry safely
‘rough, I waited to see what would heppen,
Te-was efne day, and gazed up at theslip of
white sky above the houses opposite, and expected something to appear init. God would
fertainly exhibit his anger in some tere
form, and would chastise my impious and wil.
ful action. 1 was very much alarmed, but stl
tore excited; T breathed the high, sharp aie

r

 

 
FATHER AND SON

of defiance. But nothing happened ; there
‘was not # cloud in the sky, not an unusual
sound in the street. Presently T was quite
sre thit nothing would happen. I had com

‘mitted idolatry. Mageantly and deliberately,

‘and God did not care.

"The rest of this ridiculous act was not
to make me question the existence and
power of God: those were forces which T did
fot dream of ignoring. But whet it did was
to lessen still farther my confidence in my
Father's knowledge of the Divine mind. My
Father ad said, positively, that if T wor
shipped & thing made of wood, God would
‘manifest his anger. I had then worshipped
chair, made (or partly made) of wood, and God
Iand madeno sign whatever. My Father, thereore, was not really acquainted with the Divine
practice in cases of idolatry. And with that,
Aismissing the subject, T dived again into the
‘unplumbed depths of the Penny Cyclo- pei.”

 

  

 

 

»
CHAPTER 11

"Tuar I might die im my early childhood was
1 thought which frequently recurred to the
tind of my Mother. She endeavoured, with
Roman fortitude, to face it without apprehenson, Soon after 1 had completed my
fith year she had written as follows in hee
seoret journal

 

“Should we be called on to weep over the
‘arly grave of the dear one whom now we are
‘endeavouring to train for heaven, may we be
fable to remember that we never eeased to pray
forand wateh over him. is easy, eomparitively, to wateh over an infant. Yet shall T
he sufficient for these things? T am not
ut God is suficent. In his strength I have
begun Use warlare, in his strength U will per
severe and T wil faint not tl ether T myself
‘or my litle one is beyond the reach of earthly
solietude.”

 

 
FATHER AND SON

"That either she ot I would be called away
from earth, and that our physical separation
‘was at hand sems to have been always aguely
present in my Mothers dreams, as an obstinate
fonvietion to be carefully recognised and
jealously guarded against.

Tt was not, however, until the course of my
seventh yen, tht the trigedy occurred, which
altered the whole course of our family existence, My Mother had hitherto seemed strong
snd in good health; she had even made the
remark to my Father, that sorrow and pin,
the badges of Christian discipleship,” appeared
to be withbeld fom her. On her birthday,
which was to be ler last, she ad waitten
thete ejaculations in her locked diary

 

“Lord, fongive the sins ofthe pas, and help
me to be faithful in Future! May this be
‘year of much blessing, year ofjubilee! May
T he kept lowly, trusting, loving! May 1
have more blessing than in all former years
combined! May 1 be happier as a wife,
‘mother, sister, writer, misres, friend!

 

‘But a symptom began to alarm her and in
the beginning of May, having consulted a
local physician without being satisfied, she
FATHER AND SON
went to see a specialist in a northern suburb
in whose judgment she had great confidence.
This oceason I recollect with extreme vividness. Thad been put to bed by my: Father,
in itself a noteworthy event. My exb stood
rear 8 window overlocking the street; my
parents ancient fourposter, a relie of the
ighteenth century, hid me from the door, but
Teould see the rest ofthe room. After falling
asleep on this particular evening, 1 awoke
silently, surprised to see two lighted candles
fon the table, and my Father seated waiting
by them. T also saw alittle meal aranged.
While {was wondering at all this, the
door opened, and my Mother entered the
room; she emerged from behind the bed
certains, with her bonnet on, having returned
from her expedition. My Father roseluriedly,
pushing back his chair, and greeted her by
xelaiming: “Well, what does he say”
‘There was a pause, while my Mother seemed
tw be stendying her voice, and then she replied,
loudly and distinctly,“ He says itis —" and
she mentioned one of Une most eruel maladies
by which our poor mortal nature ean be to
mented, Then T sae them fold one another
fn-a silent Jong embrace, and presently sink
together out of sight on their knees, at the

 

 

 
PATHER AND SON
further side ofthe bed, whereupon my Father
lited up his voice in prayer. Neither of them
lind noticed me, and now Ixy back on my
pillow and fll asleep.

‘Next morning, when we three sat at breskfast, my mind teverted to the seene of the
previous night. With my eyes on my plate,
‘as I was eutting up my food, Lasked, casually,
"What is 1” mentioning the disease whose
wun mame T had heard from my bed
Receiving no reply, T looked up to discover
why my question was not answered, and I saw
my parents gasing, at each other with lamen:
table eyes. In some way, I know not how, I
‘was conscious of the presence of an incom
‘munieable mystery,and T kept silence, though
tortured with curiosity, nor did T ever repeat
‘my inguiy.

“About & fortnight later, my Mother began
to go thee times a week all the ong way fom,
Islington to Pimlico, inorder to visit a certain
pmctitioner, who undertook to apply «special
treatment to her case. This involved great
fatigue nnd distress to her, Dut so far as T was
personally concerned it did mea grest deal of
ood. invariably accompanied her, and when
she was very tired and weak, T enjoyed the
pride of believing that 1 protected her. The

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘movement, the exercise, the occupation lifted
‘my morbid fears and superstitions like aloud.
"The medic teatinent to. which my poor
Mother was subjected wos very pain, and
she had a peculiar sensitivenes to pain. | She
cried on her evangelical work as lang as she
powibly could, continuing to converse with her
fellow passengers on spiitul matters. It was
wonderful that woman, so reserved and
proud as she by nature was, could conquer $0
Completely her natural timidity. Inthose last
‘months, she scarcely ever got into a rallway
carriage oF into an omnibus, without presently
offering traets to the persons sitting within
reach of her, or endeavouring to begin n con‘ersition with some one on the sufficiency of
‘the Blood of-Fesus to cleanse the human heart
from sin. Her manners were so gentle and
perussive, she looked so innocent, her small,
Sparkling features were lighted up with so
much benevolence, that T'do not think she
fever met with discourtesy or roughness.
Tmitative imp that T was, I sometimes tok
part in these steange conversations, and was
‘mightily puffed up by compliments paid, in
swhispers, to my infant piety. But my Mother
very properly discouraged this, as tending in
‘me to spiritual pride

   

 
FATHER AND SON

AF ny parents, in thee desire to separate
themselves fom the word had regretted that
{rough sr happines they seme to have
Torte the Christan privege of afin,
they could not continue to complain of any
absence of temporal adversity. Everything
Seemed to combine, inthe couse of hs fal
{ent 1926, to rus and sara them. stat
Troment when Hine ees » special dain
ton thei reourees thor alder income,
iteed of being. inconed,_ was. srously
dliminished, There ts ile sympathy fl in
this worl of etre fr the slentslerings
tf the gente! poor, yt thee i no cw that
Alserver« tore charitable commisertion.

‘At thebestof tine, the money which
pert ind to spend was an exiguous and at
Inehtie sum. ‘Srey economia, proud
ina olfcioned mode now quits out of
fashion to once the fact of tele poverty,
Pinflly scrupulous t0 void giving neo
tenienceoshop-peopl, tradesmen or servants,
their le Ssaneil carer nd to be cari
oft with the adrones of» campaign through
Stunt eountry. Rut nom, atthe moment
‘when fea pressing elins were de on eit
reouress, my Mother’ small expital iddenly
imppeated. Te had been placed, on bad

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
nuvice (they were as children in such matters),
jn a Comish mine, the grotesque name of
‘which, Wheal Maria, eeame familiar to my
fears. "‘One day the river Tamar, in « playfal
‘mood, broke into Wheal Maris, and
‘peniny more was ever lifted from that unfortihte enterprise, About thesame time, a small
nnvity which my Mother had inherited also
‘ceased to be paid.

“On my Fathers books and lectures therefore,
‘the whole weight now rested, and’ that at a
moment when he was depressed and unnerved
bbyanxiety. Te was contrary 0 his principles to
orrow money, so that it became necessary to
ay doctors and chemists ills punetually, and
yet to carry on the little household with the
very small margin. Each artifice of economy
was now exercised to enable this to be done
‘without falling into debt, and every branch of
expenditure was eut down; clothes, books, the
little garden which was my Fathers pride, all
Tele the pressure of new poverty. Even our
food, which had always been simple, now
Fhecame Spartan indeed, and I am sure that
‘my Mother often pretended to have no appe‘ite that there might remain enough to satisfy
‘my hunger. Fortunately my Father was able
to take us away in the autumn for six weeks

o

 

 
FATHER AND SON
by the sea in Wales, the expenses ofthis tour
boeing paid for by « professonsl engagement,
0 that my seventh birthday was spent in an
ecstasy of happines, on golden sans, under
‘ brilliant sky, and in sight of the glorioas
‘ure ocean beating in from an infinitude of
melting horizons. Here, too, my Mother,
perched in # nook of the high rocks, surveyed
the west, and forgot for a little while her
‘weakness and the gmaveing grinding psi

‘But in October, our sorrows seemed to elose
fn upon us. We went back to London, and
for the first time in their marred life, my
parents were divided. My Mother was now so
Seriously weaker that the omnibusjourneys to
Pimlico became impossible. My Father coul
not lenve his work, and so my” Mother and 1
hud to take a gloomy lodging close to the
‘doctor's house. ‘The experiences upon which
presently entered were of a nature in whieh
childhood rarely takes e part. T yas now my
‘Mother's sole and ceaseless companion ; the
silent witness of her suflering, of her patience,
of her vain and delusive attempts to obtain
alleviation of her anguish. or neerly three
‘months I breathed the atmosphere of pain,
saw no other light, heard no other sounds,
thought no other thoughts, than those which

o :

 

 
FATHER AND SON
sccompany physic suffering and weariness
‘To my memory these weeks seem years T
have mo measure of their monotony. The
lodgings were bare and yet tawdry; out of
dingy windows we looked from a second storey
‘upon « dull small street, drowned in autumnal
fog. My Father came to see us when he
cou, but otherwise, save when we made our
‘morning expedition to the doetor, or when a
slatteraly girl waited upon us with ome
distasteful meals, we were alone,—without
tn other occupation than to look forward to
‘hat occasional abatement of suffering whieh
‘was whit we hoped for most.

Te is dificult for me to recollect how these
interminable hours were spent. But T read
loud in great part of them. T have now in
‘my mind’s cabinet a picture of my chair
tamed towards the window, paetly that 1
right see the book more distinctly, partly not
to sce quite so dlstinety that dear patient
figure rocking on her sof, or lesning, ke «
funeral statue, like a muse upon a monument,
with her head on her arms against the mantel
Piece, Tread the Bible every day, and at
‘uch length, also,—with T eannot bat think
some praiseworthy patienee,—a book of incommunienble dreariness, called Newton's

 
FATHER AND SON
‘Thoughtson the Apocalypse.” Newton bore
4 great revemblance to my old aversion, Jukes,
tnd T made «sort of playful compact with my
‘Mother that iT read aloud a certain number
of pages out of» Thoughts onthe Apocslypse,”
‘act reward [should be allowed to teste my
‘own favourite hymns” Among these there
‘was one which united her suffnges with mine
Both of us extremely admined the piece by
‘Toplady which begins :—
What hgh my fal eet fe
‘Continual watching oe,
| eeepc aia
‘Doman the teams 0 ep
To this day, T eanot repeat this hymn
without a sense of poignant emotion, nor ean
L pretend to decide how much of this is due
‘writs merit and how much to the peculiar
nature of the memories it recalls ut it
tight be as rude as I genuinely think it to be
skilful, and T should continue to regard it as
‘suered poem. Among all my childish memories
hone is clearer than my looking up,
reading, in my high treble,
ind Author an Grn

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Ho the yn ht ar ty
Wie) dames Tt re
mere ign or
and betting my Mother, her eyes brimming
with tery ander albesteineHger ighty
Ticked together, mmr in unconscios
Fem Sh Than lag at
amor sey bv
In out lodgings at Pili Team sor «
ese of verse whlch excreked s lsting
ence on my taste. Te was called “The
Cameron's Drm,” and it had been writen
bya tan dames Fiylop, «schoolmaster on
a untonatT do tot know how i cine
ino my postion, but T remember it as
sdorned by an extremely dat and l-executed
woodcut of lake sugared by ountans,
it tombntones inthe foreground. This aga
Trious frontpiece postvelyfhsisted ine,
aod lee further gloomy chan to the ballad
iu. Tt was in this copy of modiore verses
thatthe sense of romance fst appealed tome,
the Kind of nature-romance whi is comected
wrth bill, and lakes and’ the picturesque
Costumes of ld times The ellowing sa,
for istance, brought a revelation tome

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON

“ew a drm ft gf ae ld,
‘A ody tr, mong the ester

T persunded my Mother to explain to me
‘twas all about, and she told me of the
ion of the Scottish saints, thir fight to
the waters and the wildemess, their cruel
murder while they vere singing “thelr last
song to the God of Salvation.” 1 was greatly
fired, and the following stanza in particular,
reached my ideal of the Sublime

Te nila ere fing, the blac erode were
“Tobe vel nd he load wt

hs hoean few dre the hander wa log,

When Wells ar wilds Sh mighty ee

‘Twenty years later T met with the only
other person whom I have ever encountered
‘who had even heard of «The Cameronian’s
Dream.” This was Robert Louis Stevenson,
‘who Ind been greatly strack by it when he
was about my age Probably the same
ephemeral edition of it reached, at the same
time, each of our pious households

"As my Mother's illness progressed, she
could neither sleep, save by the use of opiates,
nor rt except in sloping postr, popped

 

 

 

 

 

   

 
FATHER AND SON
up by many pillows. Tt was my great joy,
and a pleasant diversion, to be allowed to
shif, beat up, and rearrange these pillows, a
task’ which I leamed to accomplish not £00
awkwardly. Her sufferings, I believe, were
principally caused by the violence of the
Imedicuments to which her doctor, who ves
trying « new and fantastie “ eure,” thought i
proper to subject het. Let those who take a
Pesimistic view of our soci progress ashe
themselves whether sich tortures could to-day
be inficted on a delicate patient, or whether
that patient would be allowed to exist in the
sreatest misery, in a lodging with no profesSonal nurse to wait upon her, and with no
companion but little helpless boy of seven
years of age. Time passes smoothly and
swiftly, and we do not perceive the mitigations
whieh he brings in his hands. Everywhere,
in the whole system of human life, improve:
‘ments alleviations, ingenious appliances and
‘humane inventions are being introduced to
{essen the great burden of suflering

If we were suddenly transplanted into the
‘world of only fifty years ago, we should be
started and” even horrorstricken by the
wretchedness to which the step backwards
‘would reintroduce us. It was in the very year

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘of which I am spoaking, a year of which my
personal memories are still vivid, that Sir
ames Simpson received the Monthyon prize
‘5 recognition of his discovery of the use of
anesthetics, Can our thoughts embrace the
iitigation of utnan torment which the
‘pplication of chloroform alone bas caused ?
My early experiences, 1 confess, made me
Singulaly conscious, wt an age when one
should know nothing about these things, of
‘that torent of sorrow and anguish and tervor
which floes under all the footsteps oF man.
‘Within my childish conscience, already, some
dim inguiry was awake as to the meaning of
this mystery of pain—

"Th lof th ea eta gts

Ia youre the whole sro of yur?
Ma Gi then the Maker an Pten
Tay He inde ple forte ert

In my Mother's esse, the savage treatment
id no good: it had to be abandoned, and a
‘ay or two before Christmas, while the fruits
twete piled inthe shop-fronts and the butchers
ere shouting outside thee forests of earases,
amy Father brought us back in a cab through

   

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘the streets to Islington, feeble and languish
ing company. Our invalid bore the journey

well, enjoying the air, and pointing out
to me the glittering evidences of the season,
‘but we paid heavily for herlittleentertainment,
since, at har earnest wish the window of the
‘ab having hon kept open, she enught «cold,
hich became, indeed, the technical cause of
‘eath thet no applications could now have long
delayed.

Yet she lingered with us six weeks more,
sand during this time T again relapsed, very
naturally, into solitude. She nov hd. the
‘are ofa practised woman, one of the saints”
from the Chapel, nd I was only permitted to
py brief Visits to her bedside, That T might
hot be kept indoors all day and every day,
‘man, also connected with the meeting-howse,
‘was pal trifle to takeeme out fora walk each
‘morning. This person, who wat by tums
familie and truculent, was the object of my
intense dislike. Our relations beeame, in the
‘truest sense, freed"; I was obliged to walle
by his side, but T held that I had no farther
responsibilty to beagreeable,and after a while
Teed to spenk to him, or to answer his tmarks. On one occasion, poor dreary man,
the met a frend and stopped to chat with him.

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
T considered this act to have dissolved the
ond I skipped lightly from his side, examined
several shop-windows which I had been for
Bididen to look into, made several darts down
‘courts and up passages, and finaly, after « deTightful morning, returned home, having known
my divections perfectly. My" oficial conductor, in a shocking condition of fen, was
crouching by the arearals looking up and
down the street. He darted upon me,
erat rage, to know * what 1

T drew myself up as tall ss
“Blind lear ofthe Bind} at bio ad with
this ingpproprinte (but very elective) Parthian
shot slipped into the house.

When it was quite certain that no allevia
tions and no medical care could prevent, oF
‘even any longer postpone, the departure of my
‘Mother, I believe that my future conduct beame the object of her greatest and her most
fpinfulsolicitude, She said tomy Father that
the worst tal of her faith eame ftom the
feeling that she wns called upon to leave that
child whom she hd so eareflly trained fr
his earliest infancy for the peculiar service
the Lord, without any knowledge of what h
further course would be. In many converstions, she most tenderly and closely urged my

 

 
 

 
 
FATHER AND SON
Father, who, however, needed no urging, to
‘watch with unceasing care over my spisitual
welfie, “As she grew nearer her end, it ws
observed thet she became calmer, and lest
troubled by fears about me. ‘The intensity of
her prayers and hopes seemed to have a prevailing forest would have been min tod
that such supplications, such confidence and
‘devotion, such an emphasis of wil, should not
bbe rewarded by an answer from above in the
alfirmative. She was able, she suid to leave
me “in the hands of her loving Lord,” or, on
‘another occasion, tothe eae of her covenant
Goa.”

“Although her fith wns so strongand simple,
‘ny Mother possessed no quality of the mystic,
She never pretended to any visionary gifs,
believed not at all in dreams or portents, and
encouraged nothing in herself or others whieh
‘was superstitious or fantastic. In order to
realise er eondition of mind, i s necesary, I
think, to accept the view that she had formed
‘definite conception of the absolute, unmodified and historial veracity, in its direct and
obsious sense, af every statement contained
within the covers of the Bible. For her, and
for my Father, nothing was symbolic, nothing
allegorieal o allusive in any prt of Sexipture,

 

 

  

 
FATHER AND SON
‘excopt what was, ino many words, proffered
‘as parable ora picture. Pushing this to its
extreme limit, and allowing nothing for the
changes of scene or time or race, my parents
ead injunctions to the Corinthian converts
‘without any suspicion that what was apposite
indealing with half breed Achtian colonists of
the lst century might not exactly apply to
respectable English men and women of the
sinetenth, They took it, text by text, as if
hho sort of diflerence existed between the
‘teroundings of Trimmalchion’s feast and those
fofaCity dinner. Both of my parents, T think,
‘were devoid ofsympathetie imagination; inmy
Father, [om sure, it was singularly absent.
Hence, although their faith was so strenuous
tlt many’ persons might have called it fanatical, there was no mysticism about them
‘They went rather to the opposite extreme, to
the cultivation of rigid “and iconoclastic
Titernlness

‘This was eusiously exemplified in the very
lively interest which they both took in what is
called "the interpretation of prophecy.” and
particularly in unwrapping the dark sayings
Hound up in the Book of Revelation. In
thei impartial survey of the Bible, they eame
tothiscollection ofsolemn and splendid visions,

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Sinister and obscure, and they bad no intention
of allowing these to be merely stimulating to
the finey, or vaguely doctrinal in symbol,
‘When they read of sens broken and of vials
‘poured forth, of the star which was called
‘Wormwood that fell from Heaven, and of
men whose hair was as the har of women snd
ther teeth asthe teeth of Hons, they did not
admit for 8 moment that these vivid mental
pictores were of a poetic character, but they
regarded them as positive statements, in
guarded languge, deserbing events which
‘were to happen, and could be resognsed when
they did happen. It was the explanstion, the
perfetly prosaic and portive explanation, of
all these wonders whieh drew them to study
the Jukeses and the Newtons whore books
they so much enjoyed. They were helped by.
‘these guides to recognize in wild Oriental
visions direct statements regarding: Napoleon
IIL. and Pope Pius IX. and the King of
‘Piedmont historic figures which they conceived
1s foreshadowed, in language which admitted
of plain interpretation, under the names of
denizens of Babylon and eompanions of the
Wild Beast,

‘My Father was in the habit of saying, in
Inter” years, that no small clement in his

 

  

 
FATHER AND SON
‘wedded happiness ld been the fuet that my
Mother and he were of one mind in the
interpretation of Sacred Prophecy. Looking
‘mak, it appears to me that this unusual mental
‘exercise was almost their only relaxation, and
‘that in thei economy it tok the pce which
is taken, in profiner fxs, by eards or the
piano. Tt was distraction; it took them
‘completely out of themselves. During those
‘melancholy weeks at Pimlico, T read aloud
another work of the samo nature as those of
Nevton and Jukes, the Hore Apocalyptiew”
‘of Me. Eliot ‘This was written, Think,
in w lew disagreeable style, and certainly i
sas less opaquely obscure to me, My” recollection distinctly is that when tay Mother
ould endure nothing else, the arguments of
this book took her thoughts away from her
pun and lifted her spirits. Elliott saw «the
‘queenly. arrogance of Popery” everywhere,
ad believed that the very last days of Babylon
the Great were come, Lest I say what may
be thought extravagant, let me quote what
ty Father wrote in his dary at the tine of my
Mother's death. He said that the thought
that Rome was doomed (as seemed not
Impossible in 1857) so affected my Mother
Ht it “ieradiated hee dying hours with an
FATHER AND SON
assurance that wat like the light of the
‘Moming Star, the haebinger ofthe vising sun.”

Alter our retum to Islington, there was
‘complete change in my selation to my Mother,
‘At Pimlico, 1 had been all-important, he omy
companion, her fiend, her confidant. But
now that she was st home again, people and
things combined to separate: me’ from ber.
Now, and forthe fist tine in my life, T no
longer slept in her room, no longer sank to
sleep under her kis, no longer saw her mild
eyes smile on me with the exliest sunshine.
"Twice day, after breakfast and before I went
to rest, I was brought to her bedside; but we
were never alone, other people, sometimes
strange people, were there. We had no cosy
tall; often she was too weak to do more thea
pet my hand: her load and slmost constant
‘ough tevified and harassed me. felt, ay 1
stood, aoekwardly and shyly, by her high bed,
‘hat I had shrunken into a Yery small and ine
‘signifcant Gigure, that she was floating out of
‘my reach, tht all things, but Tew not hat
for hovt, were coming to an end. She herselé
twas not herself; het head, that used to beheld
0 eect, now rolled or sank upon the pillow
the sparkle was all extinguished from those
Dright, dear eyes. I could not understand it;

 

 
FATHER AND SON
T meditated long, long upon it all in my in
fantile darkness, in the garcet, or in the little
slip of' cold room where my bed was now
placed; anda great, blind anger against knew
‘ot what awakened in my soul

‘The two retreats which T have: mentioned
‘were now all that were left tome. In the backparlour some one from outside gave me ocfasional lessons, of adesultory character. The
reakfast-room was often haunted by visitor,
inkown to me by fue or name,—Iadies, who
tused to pity me and even to pet me, until 1
‘hoeame nimble in esenping from their caresses.
Everything seemed tobe unixed, uncertain it
was lke being on the platform of x rails
station waiting for a train, In all this time,
the agitated, nervous presence of my Father,
whose pale face was permanently drawn with
anxiety, added to my perturbation, and Ibex
fame miserable, stupid, ab if 1 had lost my
sway in scold fog.

Had 1 been older and more intelligent, of
‘oune it might have been of him and not of
‘myself tht T should have been thinking. As
{Tnow look back upon that tragic time, its for
hima that my heart bleeds, for them both, s0
Singulely fed as they were to support and
‘cer one another in an existence which their

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
own innate and cultivated characteristics had
made Tittle hospitable to other sources of
comfort. This is not to be dwelt on here
‘Hut what’ must be recorded was the extra:
ordinary tranguillity, the serene and sensible
resignation, with which at length my parents
faced the avful hour. Language eannot utter
‘what they suffered, but there was no rebellions
tno repining; in. their case even an atheist
tight admit thatthe overpowering miracle of
grace was mightily efficient.

‘Tscems slimost erul to the memory of their
‘opinions that the only words which rise to my
‘mind, the only ones which seem in the last deee adequate to describe the attitude of my
parents, ld fallen from the pen of one whom,
in their want of imaginstive sympathy, they
Inad regarded as anathema But Jobn Henry
‘Newman might have come from the contemplaton of my Mother's death-bed when he wrote:

‘Al the trouble which the world nits upon
‘as and which flesh cannot but foel—somow,
pin, care, berenvement,—theve avail nob to
disturb the tranquility nd the intensity with
‘which fith gazes atthe Divine Majesty.” It
‘eas trangulity,” it was not the rapture of
the mystic. Allmost in the last hour of her
lie, urged to confess her joy” in the Lord,
FATHER AND SON
‘my Mother, rigidly honest, meticulous in self.
‘analysis, as ever, replied: * [have peace, but
not jy. Te would not do to go into eternity
‘with aie in my mouth.”

‘When the very end appronched, and her
rind was growing clouded, she gathered her
strength together to say to my Father, Lal
‘walk with Him in white, Won't you take
yourlaml and walk with me” Confused with
orrow and slam, my Father filed to understand her meaning. She became agitated, and
she repeated two or three times: *Take our
Inmb, and walk with me!” ‘Then my Father
‘comprehended, and pressed me forward; her
‘hand fell softly upon mine and she seemed
content, ‘Thus was my dedication, that had
begun in my cradle, sealed with the most
solemn, the most poignant and irresistible insstence, at the death-bed of the holiest and
purest of women. But what « weight, intolfable as the burden of Atas, to lay on the
shoulders of lite fragile child!

  
CHAPTER IV

Cenranst the preceding year, the seventh
fof my life, ad’ been weighted for us with
‘comprehensive disaster. T have not yet men=
tioned that, atthe beginning of my Mother's
fatal less, misfortune exme upon her
brothers. have never known the partislars oftheir run, but, believe in consequence
of A's unsuccessful speculations, and of the
fc that E. had allowed the use of his name
ss. surety, both my uneles were obliged toy
fom their editors, and take refage in Paris,
‘This happened just when our need was the
Sorest, and this, together with the poignaney
of knowing that their sister's devoted Inboors
for theta liad been all in vain, added to their
unhappiness, Tt was doubtless also. the
reason why, having left England, they wrote
to us no more, carefull concealing ftom is
even their address, so that when my Mother
ied, my Father was unable to communicate

 

 
FATHER AND SON
with them. T fear that they fell into. dire
Aistess; before very long. we learned that
‘A. had died, but it was fiteen years more
before we heard anything of E, whoselife had
at length been preserved by the Kindness of
fan old servant, but whose mind was now so
clouded that he could recolee ite or nothing
of the past; and soon healso died. Amiable,
‘entle, without any species of practical ability,
they were quite unfited to struggle with the
‘orld, whic Ind touched thera only to wreck
them,

"The flight of my uncles at this particular
juncture left me without » relative om my
‘Mother's side at the time of her dexth. This
Jsolation threw my Father into a sa perpleity
His only obvious souree of income—but it
happened to be a remarkably hopeful one—
‘was an engagement to deliver «long series of
Ieetures on marine natural history throughout
the north and centre of England, ‘These
lectures were an entire novelty; nothing like
them had been offered to the provineial pubic
Defore; and the fact that the newly-invented
‘marine aquarium was the fashionable toy of
‘the moment added to their attraction. My
Father was bowed down by sorrow and care,
That he was ‘not broken, His intelletual

 

  
FATHER AND SON
forees were at their height, and so was his
populisty as an author. The lectures were
to begin in March; my Mother was buried on
the 1th of February. It seemed at fist, in
‘the inertia of bereavement, tobe all beyond
his powers to make the supreme effort, but the
‘wholevome prick of need urged him on. Tt
‘was a question of paying for food and clothes,
of Keeping a roof above our heads. ‘The captain of «vessel ina storm must navigate bis
ship, although his wife ies den in the eabin,
‘That was my Father's postion in the spring
‘of 1857; he had to stimulate, instruct, ease
large audiences of strangers; and seem gay,
although affiction and loneliness had settled
Imhis hear He had to do this, or starve.
But the didiclty still semained. During
these months what was to become of met
[My Father could not take me with him from
Ihoel to hotel and from lecture-hal to leeture~
Ill, Nor could he leave me, as people leave
the domestic eat, in an empty house for the
neighbours to feed at intervals ‘The dilemma
threatened to be insurmountable, when suddeny there deseended upon us a kind, but
little-known, paternal cousin from the west
‘of England, who had hexed of our eslamities,
‘This lady had a large family of her own at

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Batol; she offered to nd room init for me
so long at ever my Father shouldbe aay in
the north, snd shen my Father, bewildered
by 90 much goodaes, stated, she came up
{0 London snd carried me foribly sway in «
whirlwind of good-nature. Heer benevolence
‘was quite spontaneous; and am not sure
Ut she had aot added tot slay by elping
to nurse ou beloved sufferer through part
her ines. OF thet Tam not postive, but
recollect very clenly her snatching me from
‘our cold and desolate eartston, and etry:
ing me of to her cheerful house a CliRon
“ere, forthe ist time, when bal through
any cigth year, Iwas thrown into the society
of young people. My cousins were none of
them, T believe, any longer children, but they
yrere youths end smaidens basly engaged in
Yafiou penona interest llcolleted in ahve
‘of whalesome family enc. Everybody ws
‘ery Kind to me, and 1 sank buck, after the
strain of so many month, ito mere child
food again. This long visit to my eosin st
Giiton must have been very delightful: Tm
Alin are that it was: yet 1 remember but
few offs incidents My memory, s0 clear
and vivid bout earlier solitary times, now in
A this society bezomes blued aud vague

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
T recolleet certain pleasures; being taken, for
Instanee, to 4 menagerie, and having a practical joke, in the worst taste, played upon me
by the pelican. One of my eousins, who was
medical student, showed me a pistol, and
hhelped me to fire it; he smoked a pipe, and
‘was oddly conscious that both the firearm and
the tobacco were definitely hostile to. my
“dedication” My gis-cousins took turns in
pptting me to bed, and on eold nights, or when
they were in a hurry, allowed me to say my
prayer under the bed-clothes instead of
Tenecling at a chaie, "The result of this was
further spiritual laxity, beoause T could
not help gong to sleep before the prayer wns
ended

"The visit to Clifton was, in fhct,« blesed
interval in my strenuous childhood. “Tt probs
ably prevented my nerves from breaking down
funder the presse of the previous months,
‘The Cliton family was God-fearing in «quiet,
sensible way, but there was «total absence of
sll the intensity and compulsion of our
religious life at Islington. T was not encour:
fged—I even remember that 1 was gently
‘subbed—when I rattled forth, parot-fshion,
‘the conventional phraseology of “the saints”
For « short, enchanting petiod of respite, I

ey

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
lived the life of an ordinary little boy, relapsing, to a degree which would have filled my
Father with despair, into childish thoughts
fand childish language. The result was that
Of this litle happy breathing:space T have
nothing to report. Vague, bal blind remem=
Drances of walks, with my tall cousins waving
like trees shove me, pleasant noisy evenings
jn a great room on the ground. floor, faint
silver points of excursions into the eountry, all,
this is the very pale and shadowy testimony
to. brief interval of healthy, happy child-life,
‘when my hard-driven soul was allowed to
have, for little while, no histo

"The life of child isso brie its impressions
fare so illusory and fugitive, that it i as
Ailficult to record its history as it would be to
design = morning cloud sailing before the
wind. It is short, as we count shortness in
after years, when the drag of lead pulls down
fm earth the foot that used to fluter with «
winged impetuosity, and to float with the
pulse of Hermes. But in memory, my child
hhood was long, long with interminable hours,
hours with the pale check pressed against the
‘window pane, hours of mechanical and
repeated lonely“ games,” which had lost thelr
savour, and were kept going by sheer inert.

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON

ness. Not unhappy, not frtful, but long.—
Jong, long. Te sems to me, as I Took back to
the life in the motherless Islington house, as
1 resumed it in that slow eighth year of my
life, that time had ceased to move. There
was a whole age between one tick of the
eight-day clock inthe hall, and the next tick,
‘When the milkman went his rounds in out
sey street, with his eldvteh seream over the
top of exch set of area railings, it seemed as
though be would never disappear agin,
‘There was no past and no future for me, and
the present felt as though it were sealed up
n a Leyden jar, Even my dreams) were
interminable, and bung stationary from the
nightly sky.

"At this time, the street was my theatre,
and I spent long periods, ax 1 have ssi,
Teaning against the window. I feel now the
coldness of the pane, and the feverish heat
that was produced, by contrast in the orbit
round the eye. Now and then amusing
things happened. ‘The onion-man was a joy
long waited for, This worthy was a tall and
bony Jerey protestant with a raucous voice,
‘who strode up our street several times a week,
currying » yoke across his shoulders, from the
‘ends of which hung ropes of onions. THe wed

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON

to shout, at abrupt intervals ina tone which
might wake the dead:

‘To bang the Pope

‘Ani synth of cher keh

‘The cheese appented tobe legendary; he
sold only onions, My Father did. not eat
ons, but he encouraged this terble fellow,
with his wild eyes and long stips of hair,
Decause of his "godly attitude towards the
Papacy,” and T used to watch him dart out of
the front door, present his penny, and retire,
graciously waving back the proffered onion.
‘On the otherhand, my Father didnot spprove
of a fat sailor, who was constant passer-by,
‘This man, who was probably erazed, wed to
wale very slowly up the eentre of our street,
ociferating with the voice of « ball,

Waste and pga

Nigtesnd day yt
‘This melancholy admonition was the entire
Uasines of his life. He did nothing at all but
walk up and down the stwets of Islington
‘exhorting the inhabitants to watch and pray.
do not recollect that this stlor-man stopped
to collect pennies, and my impresion is that
the was, alter his fashion, Volunteor evangelist.

5

 

 
FATHER AND SON

‘The tragedy of Mr. Puneh was another, and
‘still greater delight 1 was never allowed to
{0 out into the street to mingle with the ite
‘crowd which gathered under the stage, and as
Iva extremely nearsighted, the impression
[received was vague. But when, by happy
chance, the show stopped opposite our door, 1
‘saw enough of thet ancient drama to be thrilled
with teror and delight. was much affected
by the intemal troubles of the Punch family
T'thonght that with a little more tact on the
part of Mis, Punch and some restraint held
‘ver temper, naturally violent, by Me. Punch
‘2 great deal of this sad_misunderstanding
right have been prevented

“The momentous close, when a figure of shapeless horror appears onthe stage, and quells the
hitherto undaunted Me. Punch, was to me the
bouquet of the entire performance. When Mr.
Punch, losing his nerve, points to this shape
nd says in an awestruck, squeaking whisper,
‘Who's tht 7 sit the butcher” and the stern
answer comes, "No, Mr; Punch” And then,
““Isitthe baker?” “No, Mr. Punch!” Who
fit then 1” (this in squeak tembling with
emotion and terror); and then the full, loud
reply, booming lke a judgment-bell, It isthe
‘Devil come to take you down to Hell,” and

oo

 

 

  

 

 
FATHER AND SON
the form of Puneh, with kicking legs sunken
in epilepsy on the floor,—all this was solemn
tnd exquisite to me beyond words. T was not
amused —I was deeply moved and exhilaated,

 

purged,” asthe old phrase hath it, with pity
and terror.
“Another joy, in lighter key, was watching

 

fantastic old’ man who came slowly wp the
street, hung about with drums and futes and
ites and coloured balls and bearing over his
shoulders a geeat stek. Children and servant
fils used to bolt up out of arens, and chaffer
with this gaudy person, who would presently
trudge on, always repeating the same set of
words—

 

Hs oer os
Ferien tory
fat clyerl
(@he orig blag pen ns bite hrs)
Ape os vik ot.
(he ningun in cnet wal

was not allowed to go forth and trade with
this old person, but sometimes our servant
aid did thereby making me feel Unt #1 did
not hold the rose of merchandise, I was very
near it. My experiences with my cousins at
(Cliton tad given me the habit of looking out
FATHER AND SON
to the world, even though it was only into
the pale world of our quiet street.

‘My Father and I were now grest friends, 1
do not doubt that he flt his responsibility to
fila faras might be the gap whieh the death of
ry Mother had made in my existence. Tspent
‘lange portion of my time in his study, while
he was writing or drawing, and though very
Hittle conversion passed between ws, T think
that each enjoyed the companionship of the
other. ‘There were two, and sometimes three
‘aquaria in the room, tanks of sea-wate, with
Glass sides, inside which all sorts of erentres
‘eral and swam; these were sourees of enda
Inid upon me the occasional task of wat
feel chcyscs ieee  elaeeeneet aim

'At other times, T dragged a folio volume
of the Penny Cyelopaedia" up to the study

‘and sat there reading succes
sive articles on such subjects as Parrots
Parthians, Passionslowers, Passover and
Pastry, without any invidious preferences, all
information being equally weleome, and
‘equally fugitive. "That something ofall this
Toose stream of knowledge clung to odd eells
of the back of my brain sems to be shown by
the fact that to this day, T occasionally find

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
ryslf aware of some stray useless fat about
peonies or pemmiean or pepper, whieh I ean
only trxce back to the “ Penny Cyclopedia"
cof my infancy.

Ie will be asked what the attitude of my
ather's mind was to me, and of mine to his,
se rogurds religion, at this time, when we
were thrown together alone so much. It is
Aificat to reply with exactitude. But so fir
ts the former is concemed, I think that the
‘extreme violence of the spiritual emotions to
‘which my Father had been subjected, had now
‘een followed by «certain reaction. He hd
‘ot changed his views in any respect, and he
was prepared to work out the results of them
with greater zeal than ever, but just at present
his religious nature, like his pysical nature,
vas tired out with anxiety and sorrow. He
‘veepted the supposition that I was entirely
‘with him in all respects, so far, that isto say,
as boing so rudimentary and feeble asa litle
child could be. ‘My Mother in her lst hours,
Tnaddvelé on our unity in God; we were drawn
together, she said, elect from the worl, ina
tuipliity of faith and joy. She had constantly
repented the words: * We shall be one family,
fone song. One Song! one Family!" My
Father, I think, accepted this as a prophecy,
FATHER AND SON
he felt no doubt of our triple unity; my
Mother had now merely passed before vs,
through door, into a world of light, where
‘we should presently jin her, where all things
would be radiant and blissful, but where we
three would, in some unknown way, be
paticulaely drawn together in a tie of
Inexpressible benediction, He fretted at the
delay; he would fain have taken me by the
hhand, and have joined her in the realms of
holiness and light, at once, without this dreary
Aaliance with earthly cares,

‘ee held this confidence and vision steadily
before him, but nothing availed against the

lancholy” of hi natural state.” He was
conscious of his dull and solitary condition,
and he saw, too, that it enveloped me. T
‘think his heart-was, a this time, drawn out
towards me in an. immense tenderness,
‘Sometimes, when the early tight descended
upon us in the study, and he could no longer
peer with advantage into the depths of hie
Iieroscope, he would beckon me. to him
Silently, and fold me closely in his ans. 1
sed 10 turn my face up to his, patiently and
‘wonderingly, while the lange, unwilling tears
{gathered in the comers of his eyelids. My
‘taining bad given me a preternatual faculty

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
of stilmess and we would slay so, without a
Word or a movement, until the darkness filled
‘the room. And then, with my itle hand in
his, we would walle sedately downstairs, to
‘the patlou, where we woul ind thatthe lamp
‘was lighted, and that our melancholy vigil
was ended, “Ido not think that at any part
of our lives my Father and I were drawn so
close to one another se we were in that
summer of 1857. Yet we seldom spoke of
what lay so warm and flagrant between us,
the flowerlike thought of our Departed.

‘The visit to my cousins had made one considerable change in me. Under the old
solitary discipline, my intelligence hd grown
at the expense of my sentiment. Twas innocent, but inhuman, "The Jong suffering and
the death of my Mother had awakened. my
Inert, had taugit me what pain was, but had
Teft me savage and morose. Id stil no idea
of the relations of human beings to one
nother; Thad leamed no word of that piloSophy which comes to the children of the poor
in the struggle of the tret and tothe children
afthe wellto-dointhe lash ofthe nursery. In
‘other words I hsd no humanity; 1 had been
carefully shielded from the chance of « eateb
ing” it, as though it were the most dangerous

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘of microbes. But now that {had enjoyed a
Tittleof the eommon experience of childhood,
‘great change had comeupon me. Before I went
‘to Clon, my mental life wasall interior arack.
of baseless dream upon dream. But, now, T
‘was eager to look out of window, to go ont in
the streets; Twas taken with a eurisity about
‘human life Ken, from my vantage of the
window-pane, E watched boys and girls go by
swith an interest which hogan to ‘be almost
with

Still T continued to have: no young con
ppenions. But on summer evenings I used to
rag my Father out, taking the initiative
‘myself, stamping in playful impatience at his
Frresolution, fetching his hat and stick, and
waiting, We used to sally forth at last
‘together, hand in hand, descending the Caledlonian Road, with all its shops, as far as
‘Mother Shipton, or else winding’ among the
serni-gentel squnees and terraces westward by
Copenhagen Street, or, best of al, mounting to
‘the Regents Canal, where re paused to lean
‘over the bridge and watch flotillas of dicks
steer under us, oF litle white dogs dash,
‘impotent furious, from stem to stern of the
_great lazy barges painted in a crude vehemence
ff vermilion and azure. ‘These were happy

ry

 

 

 

  

 
FATHER AND SON
hours, when the spectre of Religion ceased to
‘overshadow ut for a litle while, when my
Father forgot the Apocalypse and dropped bis
austere plirseology, and when our bass and
treble voices used to ring out together over
some foolish little jest or some mirthful reolTection of his past experiences. Little soft
‘oases these, in the hard desert of our sandy
spiritual life at home,

‘There was an unbending, too, when we used
to sing together, in my eave very tunelesly.
T had inherited plentiful lack of musical
‘genius from my Mother, who lad neither ext
ror voiee, and who bad said, in the course of
ther last illness, *K shall sing His prise, at
length, in strxine T never eould master here
below.” My Father, on the other hand, had
some knowledge of the principles af vocal
music, although not, Tam afeai, much tase.
He had at least great fondness for singing
hhymnns, in the manner then popular with the
‘Evangelicals, very loudly, and s0 slowly that I
‘used to count how many words 1 could read,
silently, between one syllable of the singing
fand another. My lack of skill didnot prevent
‘me from being zealous at these vocal exercises,
and my Father and T used to sing lustly
together. ‘The Wesleys, Charlotte Elliott

o A

 
FATHER AND SON
(Just as I amwithout one plea") and James
Montgomery ("For ever with the Lord")
represented his predilection in hymnology. 1
acquiesced, but thet would not have been my
independent choice, ‘These represented the
evotional verse which made its diret appeal
to the evangelical mind, and served in tose
“Duseyite” days to counteract the High
Chureh poetry founded on «The Christian

     

 

Yeu” Of that famous volume I never met with
1 copy until was grown up, and equally un
known in ourcirelewere the hymns ofNewman,

 

keep me entirely ignorant of the poetry of
the High Church, which deeply offended hi
Calvinism ; he thought thet religious uth
could be sucked ip, like mother’s milk; from
fnymns which were godly and sound, and yet
correctly verified; and I was therefore
cateflly trained in this direction from an
aly date. But my piri ad rebelled against
some of these hymns, especially against those
‘written—a mighty “multitude—by  Horat

onse; naughtily refusing to reed Bonar’ "1
heard the voice of Jesus sty" to my Mother
in our Pimlico lodgings. A seerethosility to
‘this particular form of effusion was sleady, at

 
FATHER AND Son
the age of seven, boginning to define itself in
‘my brain, side by side with an unctuous
infantile conformity.

T find « dificalty in recalling the precise
hture of the religious instruction whieh my
Father gave mest this time. It was incessant,
‘and it was founded on the close inspection of
the Bible, particularly of the epistles of the
‘New Testament. This summer, as my eighth
‘year advanced, we read the « Epistle to the
Hebrews” with very great deliberation stop.
Ping every moment, that my Father: might
expoundit, vers by verse. The extmordinry
Deauty of the language,—for instance, the
Iatebless cadences and images of the’ fist
chapter —made a certain impression upon my
imagination, and were (I think) my ‘earliot
initiation into the mayie of literature, T was
Incapable of defining what I felt, but 1 cer.
thinly had s grip inthe throat, which was in
its essence « purely aesthetic emotion, when
ty Father read, in his pure, lange, singing
voice, such passages as “The heavens are
the works of Thy hunds. They shall perish,
Dut Thou remainest, and they all shall wx old
as doth a garment, andas a vesture shalt ‘Thou
fold them up, and they shall be changed; but
‘hou art the same, and Thy years shall not

”

 
FATHER AND SON
fail” “Bat the dialectic purts of the Epistle
punted and confused me. Such metaphysical
eas as “laying agsin the foundation of reppentance from dead works” and * eruifying
The Son of God afresh” were not suecessfully
Fought down to the level of my understanding,

My Father's religious teaching to. me was
almost exclusively doctrinal. He did not
observe the value of negative education, that
is to say of leaving nature alone to fill up the
‘gops which i€ is her design to deal with at a
{iter and riper date, Heedid not, even stil
Iimmself with those moral injunctions which
should form the basis of infantile discipline.
ee is in « tremendous burry to push on my
spiritual growth, and he fed me with theo
Toqieal meat which i was impossible for me to
digest, Some glimmer of a suspicion that he
‘vas saling on the wrong tack must, I should
Suppose, ve broken in upon im when we
Tuad reached the eighth and ninth chapters of
Hebrews, where, addressing readers who hd
teen brought up under the Jewish dispenste
tion, and bad the formalities of the Law of
Moses in their very blood, the apostle battles
‘with their dangerous conservatism. Ttisa very
hoble piece of spiritual casustey, but it is

  

   

 
FATHER AND SON
sjgnally unfitted for the comprehension of «
child, Suddenly, by my flushing up with
‘anger and saying, “O how I do ate that Law,”
‘my Father perceived, and paused in amaze
‘ment to pereeve, that I took the Law to be a
person of malignant temper from whose cruel
Fhondage, and from whose intolerable tyranny
‘and unfiness, some excellent person was
frying out to be delivered, T wished to hit
Law with my fst, for being so mean and
‘unreasonable.

Upon this, of course, it was necesary to
reopen the whole line of exposition, My
Father, without realising if, bad hoen talking,
‘on his own level, nt on mine, and now he
condescended to me. But without very great
success. The melodious language, the divine
forensic audacities, the magnificent. eb. and
flow of argument which make the Epistle to
the Hebrews” such a mirucle, were fir and
sway beyond my reach, and. they only
bewildered me. Some evangelical childsen of
‘my generation, I understand, were brought up
‘on s work called “ Line upon Line: Here »
Tittle, and there a Little” “My Fathers
fmbition would not submit to” anything
‘suggested by such a ttle as that, and he
committed, from his own point of view, «

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
fatal mistake when he sought to build spires
and battlements without having been at the
‘eins to settle a foundation beneath them.

‘Wewere not always reading the *Rpistle to
the Hebrews," however: not always was my

‘made to ereep by having i insisted
‘upon that almost all things are by the Law
purged with blood, and without blood is no
remission of sin.” "Tn our lighter moods, we
fumed to. the “Book of Revelstion,” and
chased the phantom of Popery through its
Tuliginous pages. My Father, 1 think, missed
‘my Mother's company almost more acutely in
his researches into propheey than in anything
cle This had been theiruncensingreereation,
and no thint person could posibly fellow the
‘curious path which they had hewn for themselves through this jungle of symbols. But,
‘more and more, my Father persuaded himselt
that T, too, was initiated, and by degrees 1
‘was mide to share in all his speculations and
interpretations.

‘Hand in hand we investigated the number
of the Beast, which number is six. hundred
three score and six. Hand in and we
inspected the nations, to. see whether they
had the mark of Babylon in their fore
heads. Hand in hand we watched the spirits

 

 

 

 

   
FATHER AND SON
‘of devils gathering the kings of the exrth into
the place which is called in the Hebrew
tongue Armageddon. Our unity in these
‘excursions was so delightful, that my Father
‘vas Tlled in any suspicion he might have
formed that T did not quite understand what
it was all about. Nor could he have desired a
pupil more docile or more ardent than I vas
in my flaming denunciations of the Papacy

If there was one institution more than
another which, at this ely stage of my
history, 1 loathed and feared, it was what we
watinhly spoke of as the sovalled Church
‘of Rome.” In later years, T have met with
Stout Protestants, gallant“ Down-with-the
‘Pope men from County Antrim, and ladies
who see the hand of the Jesuits in every
Public md private misfortune. Tt is the habit
‘6f 4 loose and indifferent age to consider this
‘dwindling body of enthusiasts with suspicion,
and to regard their attitude towards Rome as
‘bea. But my own feoing is thet they are
all too mild, that their denunciations err on
the side of the anodyne, T have no longer
the slightest wish myself to denounce the
oman communion, but, if itis to be dane, 1
hhave an idea that the latter-day Protestants
do not know hove to doit. In Lord Beacons:

  

 

 

 
PATHER AND SON
field's phrase, these anti-Pope men ‘don't
understand their own silly business” ‘They
make conoessions and allowances, they put ot
loves to touch the accursed thing.

‘Not this did we approach the Scarlet
Woman inthe Ries, We palliated nothing,
swe believed in no good intentions, we used (I
myself sed, in my tender innoceney) language
of the seventeenth century such as is now no
Tonger introduced into. any species of eontroveny. As e litle boy, when T thought,
‘with intense vagueness, of the Pope, I used to
shut my eyes tight and eleneh my fists, We
‘welcomed any social disorder in any part of
Ttaly, as likely to be annoying to the Papacy.
If there was a eustom-house officer stabbed in
4 frnear at Sassari, we gave loud thanks that
liberty. and light’ were breaking in. upon
Sardinia If there was an unsuccessful
attempt to murder the Grand Duke, we ited
kup our voices to celebrate the faith and
sufferings of the dear persecuted Tuseans, and
the record of some apocryphal monstrosity in
Naples would only reveal to us a glorious
‘opening for Gospel energy. My Father
felebrated the announcement in the news:
papers of « considemble emigrtion from the
Papal Dominions, by rejoicing at this out
 

 
FATHER AND SON
crowding of many, throughout the harlot's
domain, from her sins and hee plagues.”

‘No, the Protestant League may consider
itself to he an earnest and active body, but T
‘ean never look upon its efforts as anything but
lukewarm, standing, as I do, with the light of
other days around me. As a child, whatever 1
right question, I never doubted the turpitude
‘of Rome. T'do not think I had formed any
iden whatever of the character or pretensions ot
practices of the Catholie Chuteh, or indeed of
what it consisted, or its nature, but I regarded
it-with » vague teror asa wild beast, the only
‘good point about it being that it was very old
find was soon to die. When I tamed to
‘Takes or Newton for further detail, 1 could
hot understand what they said. Peshaps, on
the whole, there was no disadvantage in thet.

Tt is possible that some one may have
observed to my Father that the conditions of
four Tife were unfavourable to our health,
although I hardly think that he would have
‘encouraged any such advice. As T look breke
upon tis faraway time, [am surprised at the
absence init of any figures but our own. He
‘and T together, now in the study among the
Sea-anemones and star-fishes snow on the exal>
bridge looking down at the ducks; now at our

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘ardlittle meals, served upas those ofa dreamy
‘widower are likely tobe when one muid-ofall‘work provides them, now under the lamp at
‘the maps we both loved sa much, this is what
Tee sno third presence is ever with us
Whether it occurred to himself that such
solitude & deus was excellent, in the long ran,
foe neither of us,or whether any chance visitor
for one ofthe " Stints,” who used to see me at
the Room every Sunday moming,

that female influence might put litle rosecolour into my pasty cheeks, I know not. All
Tam sure of is that one day, towards the close
of the summer, as Twas guaing into the strest,
saw & four-whesled cab stop outside our
oor, and deposit, with several packages, 9
range lady, who was shown up into my
Father's study and was presently brought down
and introdgced to me.

Miss Marks, as T shall take the liberty of
calling this person, was 0 long a part of my
life that I must pause to describe her. She
‘was tal, rather gaunt, with high ehesk-bones
hier tocth were prominent and very white; her
eyes were chiouclue, and’ were always
tbsolutely fixed, wide open, on the person she
spoke to; her nose was inclined to be red at
the tip. She had s kind, hearty, sharp mode

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
of talking, bat did not exercise it much, being
‘onthe whole tacitur. She was bustling and
nervous, not particulaey refined, not quite, I
imagine, what i called “a lady.” T supposed
her if I thonght of the matter at all, to be
very old, but perps she may have seen, when
‘we knew her first, some forty-five summers.
‘Miss Masks was an orphan, depending upon
hier work for her living; she would not, in
‘these days of examinations, have come up to
the mecessry educational standards, but she
Inad enjoyed experince in teeing, and was
prepared to be a conseientions and careful
‘governess, up to her lights. 1 was now informed by may Father that it wasin thiseapacity
that she would in future take her place in our
household. Twas not informed, what 1
radually Ieared by observation, that she
‘would also actin it as housekeeper

‘Mise Marks was s somewhat grotesque personage, and might easily be painted asa ind
‘of eccentric Dickens character, « mixture of
Mrs. Pipehin and Miss Sally Bross. Twill
confess thnt when, in years to come, 1 read
‘“Dombey and Son,” certin features of Ms,
Pipehin di irresistibly remind me of my ex
cellent past governess. can imagine Miss
‘Marks saying, but witha facetious intent, that

10

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
children who sniffed would not. go to heaven.
‘But Iwas instantly ashamed of the parallel,
‘eeause my'gaunt old friend was a thoroughly
good and honest woman, not intelligent and
‘ot graceful, but desirous in every way to do
hher duty. Her duty to me she certainly di,
tnd T am affaid T hardly rewarded her with
‘the devotion she deserved. From the first, 1
was indiferen to her wishes, and, as much a8
was convenient, T ignored her existence. She
hheld no power over my attention, and if 1
‘guidance along the path of
it was because, odd as it may
sound, I really loved knowledge, I accepted
her company without objection, and though
there were occasional outbreaks of tantrums
fon both sides, we got on very well together
for several years. I didnot, however, at any
time surrender my inward will to the wishes
of Miss Marks
In the circle of our life the religious element
took so preponderating place, that it is impossible to avoid mentioning, what might
otherwise seem unimportant, the theologial
views of Miss Marks. How my Father had
Aiscovered hero from what field of educational
enterprise he plucked her in her prime, I never
new, but she used to mention that my Fathers

 

 
FATHER AND SON
tministations had “opened her eyes,” from
‘which “scales” had fallen. She had accepted,
‘on their presentation to her, the entire gamut
ofhispinciples. Miss Marks was accustomed,
‘while putting me to bed, to dwell darkly on
‘the incidents of her past, which had, 1 fear,
been an allicted one. T believe T do her
rather limited intelligence no injury when T
say that it was prepared to swallow, at one
‘mouthful, whatever my Father presented tot,
so delighted was its way-wor possessor to fin
herself in comfortable, or, at least, an
pendent postion, Shesoon bowed, if there was
Indeed any resistance from the fist, very con
tentedly in the louse of ‘earning to
repeat, with marked fluency, the customary
formulas and shibboleths. On my own religious development she had no grest influence.
‘Any such guttering theologial rashlight as
‘Miss Marks might dutifully exhibit faded for
mein the blaze of my Fathers glaring beaconlamp of faith.

“Hardly was Miss Marks settled in the fui
‘than my Father left us on an expedition about
‘which my curiosity was exercised, but not,
tuntil later, satisfied. “He had gone, as we
afterwards found, to South Devon, toa point
fon the coast which he had known of old

109

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘Here be had hired» horse and hd ridden
bout until he saw spot he liked, where a
Villa was being built on speculation. Nothing
‘equals the courage of these reelase men my
Father got off his horse, and tied i tothe gate,
‘and then he went in and bought the house on
‘ninety-nine years lease, I need hardly say
‘that he bad made the matter «subjest of the
most eamest prayer, and had entreated the
Lord for guidance. When he felt attracted to
‘this particular villa, he did not doubt that he
was directed to it in answer to his suppliestion,
‘and he wasted no time in further balancing ot
inquiring, On my eighth birthday, with bag
‘and agaruge complete, we all made the tolful
journey down into Devonshire, and T was
tawn-hild no longer

 

 
CHAPTER V

 

‘A. xnw clement now entered into my
f fiesh rival arose to compete for me with
tay Father's dogmatic theology. This rival
‘was the Sea, When Wordsworth was a little
hil, the presence of the mountains and the
‘clouds lighted. up his sprit sith gleams that
‘were like the flashing of @ shield. He has
eseribed, in the marvellous pages of the
‘ Prelsde,"the impact of nature upon the infant
soul, but he bas deserbed it vaguely and
faintly, withsome infirmity ofove fr days is‘owned by memory,"—I think beeause he was
brought up in the midst of spectacular beauty,
and could name no moment, mark no “here”
‘8 * now,” when the wonder broke upon hit.
‘AL the age of twice five summers, he thought
it was, thet he began to. hold unconscious
intercourse with nature, “drinking in pure
‘organic pleasure” from the floating mists and
‘winding waters, Perhaps, inhis anxiety to be

 
FATHER AND SON
truthful, and in the absence of any record he
‘But the date of this conscious raptate too inte
rather than too ely. Certainly. my own
impregnation with the obseurely-defined but
eenly-falt loveliness of the open sen dates
from the frst week of my ninth year,

"The village, on the outskirts of which we
hnad taken up’our abode, was built parallel to
the cline above the shore, but Half mile
inland. Por a long time after the date T ave
‘now reached, no other form of natural seenery
than the sea bad any effect upon me at all,
"The tors of the distant moor might be draw
in deep bine agunst the pallor of our morning
fr our evening sky, but T never looked at
them. Tt was the Sea, always the se nothing
but the sea. From our house, or fiom the
field at the back of our house, or from any
‘part of the village itself there was no appeardance to suggest uote there could lie anything
in an easterly direction to break the infinitude
fof red ploughed fields. But on that earliest
‘morning, how my heart remembers! we
hastened, —Miss Marks, the maid, and 1
between them, —slong a couple of high-walled
lanes, when suddenly, far below us, in an
immense are of light, there stretched the
‘enormous plain of waters. We had but to

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘rons n step or two of downs, when the hollow
sides of the great limestone cove yawned at
four fet, descending, like a broken sup, down,
own to the moon of snow-white shingle and
the expanse of ble roen sex

In these twenticth-eentury days, a cate
‘municipality has studded the down with rustic
seats and hes shutits dangers out with rains,
Ing ext a winding exeriage-drive round the
curves of the cove down to the shore, and has
planted sansage laurels at intervalsin clearings
made for that asthetie purpose. When last 1
sew the place, thas smertened and secured,
with its hair in eusl-papers and its fect in
petentleathers, 1 turned from itn snger and
Aisgust, and could almost have wept. I suppose that to those who kmew it in no other
fuise, it may still have beauty. No parish
councils, beneficent and shrevd, oan obscure
the lustre of the waters or compress the vastnes of the sky. But what man could do to
rake wild beauty ineffectual, tre and empty,
thas amply been performed at Oddicombe.

Very different was it ity years ago, in its
tuncouth majesty. No road, save the merest
‘goat-path, ed down its concave wilderness, in
Which loose furee-bushes and untrimmed
‘rambles wantoned into the likeness of trees,

  
FATHER AND SON
‘ech draped in audacions tissue of wild cle‘matis, Throvgh this fimtastie maze the
traveller wound his way, led by litle other
‘lue than by the instinet of descent. For me,
fs child it meant the Inbour of a long, aa
endless morning, to descend to the snow-white
pebbles, to spart at the edge of the cold, sharp
Sea, and then to climb up home again, slipping

he sticky red mud, clutching nt the smooth
boughs of the wild ash, toiling toiling upwards
into lt land’ out of that hollow world of
rocks.

‘On the frst occasion, I recollect, our Cock
ney housemaid, enthusiastic young erestare
that she was, flung herself down upon her
knees, and drank of the salt waters. Mis
Marks, more instructed in phenomens, refained, but T, although I seas perfectly aware
what the taste would be, insisted on sipping &
few drops from the palm of my band. his
was a sight recurence of what 1 have called
‘my “natural magic” practice, which had
ppesed into the beckground of my mind, but
had not quite disappeared, I recollect that T
‘thought T might secure some power of walking on the sea, if 1 drank of ita pesfctly

rational movement of mind, like those of
serages

 

 
FATHER AND SON
My great desire was to walk out over
the Sea as far as I could, and then lie fat
fon it, face downwards, and peer into. the
‘depths, Twas tormented sith this ambit
and, like many grown-up people, was so fully
‘ceupied by these vain and ridiculous desires
tat T negleted the actual natural pleasures
round me. ‘The idea was not quite so demented sit may seem, because we were in
the habit of singing, as well as reading, of
those enraptured beings who spend their days
flinging down their golden crowns upon
the jesper seu” Why, Tangued, should T not
he able to fing down may stzaw hat upon the
tides of Oddicombe * “And, without question,
1 majestic seene upon the Lake of Gennesaret
had also inflamed my funy. OF all these
things, of course, I was earful to speak to no
Te-was not with Miss Marks, howeves, but
with my Father, that I became accustomed to
make the laborious and exquisite journeys
down to the seu and hack again, His work
‘as «naturalist eventually took him, laden with
implements to the roek-poos on the shore and
TLyins in attendance as an acolyte. But our
eauliest winter im South Devon as darkened
for us both by diseppointments, the cause of

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
which Iny, at the time, far out of my reach,
In the sptit of my Father were then running,
with furious veloity, two hostile streams of
uence. T was standing, just now, thinking
‘of these things, where the Cascine ends in the
wooded point which is esrved out sharply by
the lion-oloured swiel of the Arno on the one
side and by the pure flow of the Mugnone on
fhe other. The rivers meet, and run parallel,
Dt there comes © moment when the one or
the other must conquer, and itis the yellow
‘vehemence that drowns the purer tide,

So, through my Fathers brain, in that year
of scientiti rss, 1857, there rushed two kinds
of thought, each absorbing, each eonvineing,
Yet totaly irreconcilable. "There i «peculiar
‘agony in the paradox that truth has two forms,
tench of them indisputable, yet each antago:
nistic to the other, It was this discovery,
that there were two theories of physical life
‘ech of which was true, but the truth of each

incompatible with the truth of the other,
whieh shook the spirit of my Father with
perturbation, Te was not, rally, «paradox, i
‘was fllaey, if he could only have known it,
Dut he allowed the turbid volume of super:
stition to drown the delicate steam of reason.
‘He took one step in the service of truth, and

 

 

    
FATHER AND SON
then he drew back in an agony, and sooepted
the servitude of error.

"This was Ue great moment in the history
‘of thought when the theory of the mutability
‘of species was preparing to throw a flood of
Tight upon all departments of human speculation and action. Tt was becoming necessary to
stand emphatically i one army or the other.
Lyell was surrounding himself with disciples,
who were making strides in the direction of
discovery. Darwin had long been collecting
facts with regard to the variation of animals
and plants. Hooker and Wallace, Ase Gray
‘and even Agussis, each in his own sphere, were
coming closer and closer toa perception of that
Secret which was frst to roveal itself clearly
to the patient and humble genius of Darwin.
In the year before, in 1850, Darwin, under
pressure from Lyell, had begun that modest
Statement of the new revoltion, that abstract
f'n essay” which developed so mightily into
“The Origin of Species.” Wollaston's* Variation of Species "had just appeared, and had
‘been nine days! wonder in the wilderness.

‘On the other sie, the reactionaries, although
never dreaming of the fate which hung over
them, had not been idle. Tn 1857 the as‘tounsing question had forthe frst time been

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
propounded with ontamely. What; then i
Gree foes eeceient Sia aeer
estge of Creation” had been supplying
Levees pencen for thove who cold
not rae fro te trend of evidence, nd who
spiel ini gale
Ing reaction by reiting, with ll the strength
‘this prestige the Geary of the notability of
ae
when a grestpolta revolution. being
‘lued, any posible adherents were sont
Fenty ted with hints ant encouraged 0
reveal their bias in a whisper. Tt-was the
tion af Cel set «gest mover often,
that before the doting oF teal eeston
tea given ta word which would be se t0
Tit up at howl of exceration, « corsin
berpagard of sound and experienced natal
ints, oxgertin the description af pei, hou
tapes reactions, tee
those who were ths insted or spond
tra vey tomas pole imino
my Pile He verccken oly Wicket
Inter on by Diwin afer ectings ofthe Royal
Society inthe summer o 1857
‘My Fathers nttud towards th theory of
saul selstion was ra nis carer, nd,

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘daly enougs, it exeresed an immense influ‘ence on my own experience asa child. Let it
‘be admitted nt once, mournful asthe admis
fs, that every instinet in his intalligence wen
fut at fist to greet the new light. Tt had
hhardly done so, when a recollection of the
‘opening chapter of Genesis checked it at the
outset, Hle consulted with Carpenter, great
Investigator, but one who was fully a5 ineapable as himself of remodelling his idens with
regard tothe old acoepted hypotheses. They
both determined, on various grounds, to have
nothing to do with the teribie theory, but to
Told steadily to the law of the xity of species
Te was exactly at this juncture thet we left
London, and the sight and occasional, but
always extremely salutary personal intercourse
‘with men of scientific leading which my Father
had enjoyed atthe British Musoum aod atthe
Royal Society came to an end. His next act
was to bum his ships, down to the last beam
and log out of which n raft could have been
made. By a strange act of wilfulnes, he
closed the doors upon himself forever.

My Vater deve adie Sir Cares
yell 1 think thatthe famous.“ Lond
Chancellor manner” of the geologist intimidated him, and we undervalue the intelligence

19

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
(of those whose conversation puts us at» di
advantage. For Darwin and Hooker, on the
‘other hand, he had « profound esteem, and T
know not whether this had anything to do
‘withthe fat that he chose, for his impetuous
‘experiment in reaction, the fleld of geology,
rather then that of zoology o botany. Lyell
had been threstening to publish « book on the
‘geological history of Man, which was to be a
Tombsbell ung into the camp of the eatastrophists. My’ Father, ater long reflection,
prepared « theory of his own, which, as he
fondly hoped, would take the wind ‘out. of
Ipuie ils cat pouty galepie ate
readers of “Genesis,” Tt was, very
‘Hat there had been no gradual modifestion of
the surfuce of the earth, or slow development
fof organie forms, but that when the cata

Liropie act of eration took place, the world
‘presented, instantly, the structural apperrance
‘of planet on which ie had long existed.

‘The theory, coarsely enough, and to my
Father great indignation, was defined by a
hasty pres as being this—that Go hid the fosails in the rocks in order to tempt geologists
into infidelity, In truth twas the logial and
inevitable conclusion of accepting, literally,
the doctrine of a sudden act of creation; it

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘emphasised the fact that any breach in the
ireular course of nature could be conceived
‘only on the supposition that the object
created hore false witness to. past processes,
hich had never taken place. For instance,
Adam woul cestainly possess hair and teeth
fand bones in ® condition whieh it must have
taken many years to accomplish, yet he was
created full-grown yesterday. He would cortsinly—though Sir Thomas Browne denied it
display an omphaize, yet no umbilical cord
had ever attached him to 8 mother.

‘Never was & book east upon the waters with
greater antiipations of success than was this
‘curious, thie obstinate, this funatiel volume.
[My Father live ina fever of sospense, waiting
forthe tremendous issue. This" Omphalos
‘of his, he thought, ws to bring all the turmoil
‘of scentfic speculation toa close, ding
geology into the arms of Seripture, and make
‘he ln eat grass with the lamb, Te was not
surprising, he admitted, that there had been
experienced an ever-increasing discord between
the fhets which geology brings to light and
the direct statements of the early chapters of
“Genesis” “Nobody was to blame for that
My Father, and my Father alone, possessed the
secret of the enigmn; he alone held the key

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘which eould smoothly open the lock of geoIogieal mystery. He offered it, with 1 glowing gesture, to atheists and Christians alike.
"This was to be the universal panacea; this the
system of intellectual therapeutics whieh eould
‘ot but heal all the maladies of the age. Bat,
las! atheists and Christinns alike looked att
and laughed, and threw it away.

Tithe course ofthat distal winter,asthepost
‘oan to ring in private letters, few and ch
find public reviews, many and searnful, my
‘Father looked in vain for the approval ofthe
‘hurls, and in van forthe aaqulescence ofthe
Scientific societies, and in vain forthe grattde
of those “thousands of thinking persons”
‘whieh he had rashly assured himself of reeei=
ing. As his reconciliation of Seriptore state
‘ments and geologieal deductions was weleomed
nowhere s5 Darwin eontinued silent, and the
‘youthful Huxley was seorful,and even Charles
Kingsley, from whom my Father had expected
the most instant appreciation, wrote that he
could not “give up the painful and slow eonelasionaf ive und twenty year’ study of geology,
tnd believe that God has writen on the racks
fone enormous and superfluous lie;"—as all
this happened or failed to happen, « gloom,

cold and dismal, descended upon our moming

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
tencups. Tt was whet the poets mean by an
“inspissated ” gloom; it thickened day by day,
‘hope and self-confidence evaporated in thin
clouds of disappointment. My Father was not
prepared for such a fate. He bd been the
Spoiled dating of the public, the constant
favourite ofthe pres, and now, like the dark
angels of ol, ieee

  

He could not recover from amazement at
having offended everybody by an enterprise
swhich hed been undertaken in the cause of
universal reconciliation.

‘Daring that grim season, my Father was no
lively companion, and circumstance after ¢
‘umstance combined to drive hima further from
humanity. He missed more than ever the sym.
pathetic ear of my Mother there was prevent
to support him nothing of that artful, female
casustey which insinuates into the wounded
consciousness of a man the eonvietion that,
After all, he is right and all the rest of the
‘world is wrong. My Father used to tramp in
Solitude round and round the red ploughed
field which was going to be his lawn, or, shel=
‘tering himself from the thin Devonian rain,
pce up and down the sil naked verandah,

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘where blossoming creepers were to be. And
T think that there was added to his chagein
with all his fellow mortals frst tincture of
‘Hat heresy which was to attack him later on.
Te was now that, T faney, he began, in his
Aepresion, to be angry with God. How
much devotion had he given, how many sacri=
fices had he made, only to’be left storming
round this red morass with no one in ll the
‘world to care for him except one pale-fuced
child with its cheek pressed to the window!
“After one of two brilliant excursions to the
sea, winter, in its dsmpest, muddiest, most
languid form, had fallen upon us and shat uy
in. Ht was dreary winter for the wifeless
‘man and the motherless boy. We had come
{nto the house, in presipitate abandonment to
that supposed answer to prayer, « great desl
too soon. In order to rake together the lump
‘sum for buying it, my Father fad denuded
Himself of almost everything, and our sticks of
chairs and tables fled but twoor three rooms.
iat the little house, or “villa” as we elle
was not papered, two-thirds were not
furnished. ‘The workmen were sill finishing
the outside when we arrived, and in that connection I recall iteinldent which exhibits
my Father's morbid delicacy of conscience

 
FATHER AND SON
‘He was nceustomed, in his beighter moments
—and this was before the publieation of his
‘Omphalos "occasionally to sing loud Dortetshire songs of his early days, in strange,
Toad Wessex lingo that I loved. One
Gctober afternoon he and I were sitting on
the verandah, and my father was singing
Just round the comer, out of sight, two ex
enters were putting up the framework of a
freenhouse. In a pause, one of them said to
his fellow: “He can zing a zong, 20 wells
nother, thoughhe bea minister.” My Father,
‘who was holding my hand loosely, elutehed it,
Aad looking up. 1 saw his eyes darken, He
never sang a seeular song again during the
‘whole of his ite

Later in the year, and after his literary
tmisfortane, his” conscience became more
‘troublesome than ever. I think he considered
the failure of his attempt atthe reconciliation
‘of science with religion to have been intended
by God as « punishment for something he had
doneorleft undone. Tn those brooding tramps
round and round the gerden, his soul was om
its knees searching the eomers of his conscience
for some sin of omission or omission, and one
by one every pleasure, every recreation, every
‘ville sraped outof the dust of past experience,

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘was magniied into a huge offence. He
‘thought that the smallest evidence of levity,
the lest unbending to human instinet, might
be seized by those around him as evidence of
Inconsistency, and might lead the weaker
brethren into offence. ‘The incident of the
carpenters and the eomie song is typical of &
condition of mind whieh now possessed my
Father, in which act afer act beeame taboo,
rot because ech was sinful in itself, but because it might lead others into sin.

have the conviction that Mist Marks was
now mightily sf of my Father, Whenever
she could, she withdrew to the room she called
her “boudoir,” a smal, chilly apartment,
sparsely furnished, ooking over what was i
process of becoming the vegetable garden.
Very properly, that she might have some
sanctasry, Miss Marks forbade me to enter
this virginal bower, which, of course, became
to mean object of harrowing curiosity.
‘Through the key-hole {could see practically
nothing ; one day I contrived to slip inside,
and discovered that there was nothing to see
‘bats plan bedstead and « toilet-table, void of
all attretion, In this “ boudoir,” on winter
aftemoons, a fre would be lighted, and Miss
‘Marks would withdraw to it, not seen by us

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘any more between high-tes and the apocalyptic
exercise known nt “vorship"—in less strenuous
Ihonseholds much less susterly practised under
the name of “ family prayers” Left meanwhile to our own devices, my Father would
mainly be reading, his book or paper held close
up tothe candle, while his lips and heavy eye
brows occasionally. quivered and_palpitate,

Titerary ardour na manne strangely exciting tome. Miss Marks in very high eap,
andher lange teeth shining, would occasionally
‘sppear in the doorway, desiring, with spurious
geniality, to know how we were getting on
‘But on these occasions neither of us replied to
Miss Marks.

Sometimes, in the course of this winter, my
Father and I had long cosy talks together over
the fie." Our favourite subject was murders.
Tonder whether litle boys of eight, soon to
‘goup-stairs alone at night, often discuss violent
‘rime with a widower-papa ‘The practic, 1
‘annot help thinking, is unusual; it, was, howfever, consecutive with us. We tied other
secular subjects, but. we were sure to come
ound at last to” whet do. you suppose they
really did with the body !" Twas told,
‘thrilled listener,the adventure of Mrs, Manning,
‘ho kill gentleman on the stairsand buried

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
him in quik-lime in the beck-ktchen, and it
‘was at this time that 1 louned the useful
historia fut, which abides with me after halt
century, that Mis. Manning was hanged
fn black satin, which thereupon went wholly
fout of fashion in England. 1 also heard
about Burke and Hare, whose story nearly
froze me into stone with horror.

"These were crimes which appear in the
chronicles. But who will tell me what “the
Carpet-bag Mystery” was, which my Father
and I diseussed evening after evening? Thave
never come aross a whisper of it since, and 1
suspect it of having been a hoax. As recall
the details, people in a boat, passing down the
"Thames, sew a earpet-bag hung high in air,
‘on one of the projections af « pierof Waterloo
ridge, Being with dificult dragged down-—
for pethaps up—this bag. was found to be full
fof human remains, dreadful buteher's business
of joints and fragments. Persons were missed,
‘were identitied, were again denied —the whole
isa vapour in my memory which sift Etsy
to define it, But clear enough is the picture
hold of myself in e high csi, on the lfthand side of the sitting-room fireplace, the
leaping flames rellected in the glas-ense of
tropical insects on the opposite wall, and my

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Father leaning anxiously forward, with uplifted
finger, emphasising to me the pros and cons of
the horrible carpet-bag evidence

T suppote thit my interest in these dieu
sions and Heaven’ knows 1 was animated
‘enough—amused and distracted my. Father,
whose iden of & stable theme for childhoods
‘ear now seems to me surprising. I soon found
that these subjects were nt weleome to every
Dolly. for, starting the Carpet bag Mystery one
rmorting with Miss Marks, inthe hope of delaying my arithmetic lesson, she fry threw
her apron over her eas, and vold me, fom that
vantage that ifT did not desist at once, she
should seream

‘Occasionally we took winter walks together,
ty Father and T, down some lane that led to
ight of the sea, or over the rolling downs.
Wee tried to reeapture the charm of those delightful strolls in London, when we used to
Jean over the bridges and wateh the ducks.
ut we could not recover thie pleasure. My
‘Father was deeply enwoven in the chain of his
‘own thoughts, and would stalk on, without a
word, buried in angry reverie. If he spoke to
‘me, on these excursions it was a pxin tometo
‘answer him. 1 could tall on easy terms with
him indoors, seated in my high bit, with our

109 .

 

  

 

 
FATHER AND SON
heads on level, but it was intolerbly IaboFiousto look up into the frmament andeanverse
‘with dark fice against the sky. ‘The actual
‘exercise of walking, too, was very exhausting to
nes the bright red mud, to the strange colour
‘of which Teould not for long while get nctustomed, becoming eaked about my little
shoes, and wearying me extremely. T would
‘grow petulant and cross, contradict my Father,
tnd oppose his whims. "These walks were distressing tows both, yet he dil not like to walle
alone, snd he hed no other friend. However,
1s the winter advanced, they had to be aban
doned, and the habit of our taking a“ const
‘tutional together was never resumed.

Took back upon myself at thistime as pon
‘cantankerous, il-tempered and. unobliging
child, The only excuse T ean offer is that 1
really was not well..‘The change to Devon
shire had not sited me; my health gave the
‘exellent Miss Marks some anxiety, but she
was not ready in reouree. The dampness of
the house was tere; indoors and out, the
atmosphere seemed soaked in chilly vapours.
Under my bed-elothes at night I shook lke a
jelly, unable to sleep Yor eold, though 1 was
Theape with coverings, while my skin was all
puckered with gooseles, I could ext nothing

 

  

 

 
FATHER AND SON
solid, without sufering immediately from vioTent hiceough, so that much of my time was
spent lying prone on my buek upon the hearthrg. awakening the echoes like a euckoo.
‘Miss Marks, therefore, cut off all food but
rilk-sop, a loathly bowl of which appeared at
every meal. Tn consequence the hieeough
lessened, but my strength declined with it. 1
languished in a perpetoal tare, Twas roused
tos consciousness that I was not considered
well by the fuct that my Father prayed pub
liely at morning and evening worship” that
itt was the Lord's will to take me to himself
there might be no doubt whatever abot
‘being a sealed ehild of God and an inheritor
of glory. I was partly diseoncerted by, partly
vain of, this open advertisment of my allments.

‘OF our dealings with the“ Saints,” a fresh
assortment of whom met ts on our arrival i
Devonshire, I shall speak presently, My
Fathers austerity of behaviour was, think,
perpetually accentusted by his fear of doing
‘anything to offend the consciences of these
‘persons, whom he supposed, no doubt, to be
‘more sensitive than they really were. He was
fond of saying that “2 very litle stain upon
the conseienee makes « wide breach i

   

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘communion with God,” and he counted
possible rors of conduct by hundreds and by
thousands. Te was in this winter Ute his
attention was particularly drawn to the
festival of Christmas, which, apparently, he
Ina seareely noticed in London.

‘On the sabjet ofall feast of the
held views of an almost grotesque peeal
He looked upon each of them as migatory
and worthless, but the keeping of Christinas
appeared to him by far the most hateful, and
nothing less than mn act of idolatey. "The
very word is Popish," he used to. exclaim,
“Christ's Mass ! pursing up his lips with the
agesture of one who tastes ssafitida by
fecident. ‘Then he would adduce the anti
Guity of the so-called feast, adapted fh
Torrible heathen rites, and itself soled relic
of the abominable Vule-Tide. He would
enounee the horrors of Christmas until it
most mide me blush to look at « hollyDerry.

‘On Christmas Day of this year 1857 our
villa sawn very unaooal sight, My Father
had given strictest charge that no diference
whatever was to be made in our meals on
that day's the dinner was to be neither more
copious than usual nor lest so, He vas

 

   

 

 
FATHER AND SON
obeyed, but the servants, secretly rebellions,
ade a small plum-pudding for themselves
(Calscovered afterwards, with pain, thnt Miss
Marks received slice of it in her boudoir.)
‘Early in the afternoon, the maids,—of whom
wwe were now advanced to. keeping two.—
Kindly remarked that “the poor dear child
‘ought to have a bit, anyhow," and wheedled
‘me into the kitehen, where T ate x slice of
pluun-pudding. Shortly T hegan to feel that
Dain inside which in my frail state was
inevitable, nd my conscience smote me
violently. At length I. could bear my
Spiritual anguish no longer, and bursting into
the study T called out: “Oh! Paps, Papa,
Thave enten of flesh offered to idols!” It
‘took some time, between my sobs, to explain
‘what had happened. ‘Then my Father sternly
ssid: “Where is the accursed thing!" I
fexplincd that as much as was left of it
‘vas stil on the kitchen table. He took me
by the hand, and ran with me into the
‘midst of the’ startled servants, seized what
remained of the pudding, and with the plate

‘one hand and me still tight in the other,
‘an till we reached the dust-hesp, when he
flung the idolatrous confectionery on to the
‘middle of the ashes, and then raked it deep

  

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
down into the mass. ‘The suddenness, the
Violence, the velocity of this extraordinary act
made an impression on my memory which
nothing will ever effice.

“The Key is lost by which I might unlock
the perverse malady from which my Father's
conscience seemed to suffer during the whole
fof this melancholy winter. But T think that
1 dislocation of his intellectual system had a
(great deal to do with it, Up to this point in
his eareer, he had, as we have seen, nourished
the delusion that science and revelation could
bbe mutually justied, that some sort of
compromise was possible, With great and
fever greater distinctness, his investigations
hhad. shown him that in all departments of
‘organic nature there are visible the evidences
‘of slow modification of forms, of the type
Aleveloped by the pressure and. practice of
‘eons. This conviction had been bore in
‘upon him until it was positively iresstible,
Where sis his pave, then, as sincere and
accurate observer Manifest, it was with
the pioncers of the new truth, it was with
Darvin, Wallace and Hooker. But did not
‘the second chapter of Genesis say that in
six days the heavens and earth were finished,
snd the host of them, and that on the seventh

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
ay God ended his work which he had
made?

Here was « dilemma! Geology certainly
seemed to be true, but the Bible, which wae
God's word, was true, Ifthe Bible sid that
all things in Hleaven and Earth were ereated
in six days, evente in six days they were —in
six literal days of twenty-four hours each. The
evidences of spontaneous variation of form,
acting, over an immense space of time, upon
evermodifying organic structures, seemed
overwhelming, but they must either be
brought into line with the six-day labour of
creation, oF they must be rejected. T have
already shown how my Father worked out
the ingenious * Omphilos” theory in order to
Justify himself as a strictly scientific observer
who was also x humble slave of revelation.
But the old convention and the new rebellion
‘would alike have none of his compromise.

‘Tos mind s0 acute and at the same time
s0 narrow as that of my Father—a mind which
is all logical and. postive without. breadth
without suppleness and without imagination
to be subjected to check of thy kind is
fagony. Te has not the relief of « smaller
ature, which escapes from the dilemma by
some foggy formula; nor the resolution of a

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Tanger nature to take to it swings and surmount the obstacle. My Father, although
hal suffocated by the emotion of being lied,
as it were on the great biological wave, never
dreamed of letting go his lateh of the ancient
tradition, but hung there, strained and buffeted.
Teisextruordinarythat he —an“honesthodman
of science," a5 Huxley once called him—should
not hve been content to allow others, whose
horizons were wider than his could be, to
pporsue those purely intellectual surveys for
Which he had no species of aptitude. As «
collector of fuets and marshaller of obseretions,
he had not a rivalin that age his very absence
‘of imagination aided him in this work, Dut
The was more an attorney than a philosopher,
tnd he lacked that sublime humility whieh is
the crown of genius, For this obstinate per~
suasion that he alone knew the mind of Goa
‘hat he alone could interpret the designs of
the Creator, whit did it rerult from if not
from a congenital lack of tht highest modesty
which replies “I do not know" even to the
‘questions which Faith, with menacing finger,
insists on having most positively answered t

 

  

 

 
CHAPTER VI

et etn yar thn in
cheney rageny
Stamler oars
errs eens
pe ea care ca
BFS os le ele
See elses
aor
Seca “ieee
aa

ee one oe
elie elStednaciiin
eta ait tae
Tiga Sen wn
fear
Steen rion heey
en a
ee eer

 

 
FATHER AND SON
churchyard, was then almost entirely concealed
by a eongeries of mean shops, which were
ultimately, before the close of my ebildhood,
removed. ‘The village consisted of two parallel
Tines of contiguous houses, all whitewashed
and most of them fronted by trifing shopwindows ; for half a mile this street ascended
to the church, and then it descended for
‘nother half-mile, ending suddenly in fields,
the hedges of which alsplayed, at intervals,
the inevitable pollard elm-tree. ‘The walk
through the village, which we seemed to make
incessantly, was very wearisome to me. 1
dreaded the rudeness of the children, and
there was nothing in the shops to) amuse
ime, Walking on the inch or two of broken
pavement in front of the houses was disagreeable and tiresome, snd the fstor which
breathed on close days from the open doors
tnd windows made me fel faint. But this
walk was obligatory, since the “ Public Root,”
4 our Title chapel was called, ay at the
farther extremity of the dreary street
We attended this place of worship immediately on our arial, and my Father, uninvited
‘but wnresisted, immediately assumed the adration of it Tt was a square, empty
‘oom, bil, for [know not whet purpose, over

 

 

  

 
FATHER AND SON
f stable. Ammoniae odours wed. to tis
through the floor as we sat there at our long
Alevations. Belore our coming, little Hock
fof persons met in the Room, s community of
the indefinite sor just then becoming frequent
inthe West of England, pious rustics connected with no other recognised body of
Christians, and depending directly on” the
independent study of the Bible. They were
Tnegely women, but there was more then
sprinkling of men, poor, simple and. generally
slokly. In later days, under my Father's min:
istration, the body increased and positively
flourished, Te came to include retired professional men, an admiral, nay, even the
brother af peer. But in those earliest years
the “brethren "and “sisters” were all of them
condinary peasants. ‘They were jobbing gardleners and journeymen earpenters, masons and
tuilors, washerwomen and domestic servants.
1 wish that T could paint, in colours so vivid
that my readers could perceive what their litle
society consisted of, this quaint collection of
humble, conscientious, ignorant and gentle
pperons. In chronicle or fiction, Ihave never
been fortunate enough to meet with anything
whieh resembled them, ‘The caricatures of
enmity and worldly seorn are as erude, to my

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘memory, as the unetion of religious conven
tionality is featureless.

"The origin of the meeting had been edd.
A few years belore we came, a crew of Comish
fishermen, quite unknown to the villagers,
‘were driven by stress of weather into the haven
under the li They landed, and, instead of
going to a public house, they looked about for
‘Broom where they could hold a prayer-mesting.
They were devout Wesleyan; they bad come
from the open sea, they were far from home,
and they had been starved by lack of thelr
customary religious privileges As they stood
bout in the stret before their meeting, they
challenged the respectable girls who exme out
to stare at them, with the question," Do you
love the Lord Jesus, my maid" Reediving
dubious answers, they pressed the inhabitants
‘to come in and pray with them, which several
id. Ann Burmington, who long afterwards
told me about it, was one of those gel, and
she repeated that the fishermen sid What
1 dreadful thing it will be, at the Last Day,
‘when the Lord says, ‘Come, ye blesed’ and
says it not to you, and then, “Depart, ye
cursed,” and you maidens have to depart”
‘They ‘were finely-bult young men, with
black beards and shining yes, and T do not

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON i
‘gestion that some fash of sex unconsciously
‘mingled with the curious episode, although
their behaviour was in all respects disereet,
Te was, perhaps, not wholly coincidence
ut almost all those particular girs remained
‘unmarried to the end of ther lives. After
thro oF three days, the fishermen went off to
seu again. ‘They prayed and sailed away,
fnd the girs, who had not even asked their
‘names, never heard of them again. Butseveral
of the young women were definitely converted,
fand they formed the nucleas of our little
suthering.

‘My Father preached, standing ata desk; ot
celebrated the communion in front of w deal
table, with a white napkin spread over i.
Sometimes the audience was $0 small, gener
ally so uneshilarating, that he was discouraged,
Dut he never flagged in energy and zeal. Only
those who hhad given evidence of intelligent
acceptance of the theory of simple faith in
their atonement through the Blood of Jesus
‘were admitted to the communion, ot, as it
‘was called “the Breaking of Bread.” It was
made a very strong. point that no one should
“break read—unless for good reason shown
until he or she had been baptized, that isto
‘say, totally minersed, in solemn eonclave, by

 

 

    

 

 
FATHER AND SON
the ministering brother, ‘This rite used,
four earliest days, to. be pesformed, with
Picturesque simplicity, in the sea on the
‘Oddicombe beach, but to this there were, even,
in those quiet years, extreme objections. A
Jeering crowd could sesreely be avoided, and
‘women, in particular, shrank from the ordeal
"This wed to be a practical difficulty, and my
Father, when communicants confessed that
they had not yet heen baptized, would shake
his head and say gravely,“ Abt ah! you shun
the Cross of Christ!” But that baptism in
the sea on the open beach was a ers” he
would not deny, and when we built our own
Tittle chapel «sort of font, planked over, was
arranged in the room itself,

‘Among these quiet, tacitumn people, there
were several whom T recall with affection,
In this remote comer of Devonshire, on the
road nowhither, they bad preserved much of
the air of that eighteenth century whieh the

lders among. themn perfectly remembered.
‘There was one old man, born before the
French Revolution, whove igure often recurs
to me. This was James Petherbedge, the
Nestor of our mecting, extremely tall and
attenuated ; he eame on Sundays in a fall,
white smock-frock, smartly embroidered

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
own the front, and when he settled himself
to Tinten, he would raise this smock like
shirt, and revel pair of immensely long thin
logs, essed in tight leggings, and ending in
shoes with buckles. A* the saered message
{ell fom my Fathers lips, the lantern jaws of
Me, Petherbridge slowly fell apart, while his
‘knees sloped to so immense a distance from
fone another that it soemed as though they
ever could meet again. He had been poss
all is life, and he used to tell us, i some
Imovlest pride, that when he was a lad, the
farmer's wife who ess his mistress used 0 sayy

T think our Jem is going to be a Method.
the do so hanker alter godly discoursings.”
Mr. Petherbridge was accustomed to pray
orally, at our prayer-meetings, in & funny old
oice like wind in hollow tree, and he
seldom filed to express a hope that “ the
Lord would support Miss Lafoy "—who wus
the village sehoolmistress, and one of our
congregation, —" in her labour of teaching the
young ides how to shoot” I, not understand.
ing’ this literary allason, long believed the
School to be addicted to some species of pistol
practice

‘The Key ofthe Room was kept by Richard
‘Moshay, the mason, who was of a generation

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘younger than Mr, Petherbridge, but yet“ getYing on in years” Moxhay, T cannot tell
‘why, was always dressed in white corduroy,
‘on which any stain of Devonshire scarlet
mud) was painfully” conspicuous ; when he
was smartened up. his appearance suggested
that somebody hed given him « coating of
‘hat rich Western whitewash which Took ike
Devonshire eresn. His locks were long and
spare, and as deadly black as his elothes were
white. "Hee was « modest, gentle man, with =
wife even more meek anvd resins than himself They never, to my recollection, spoke
unless they were spoken to, and their melanholy impassiveness used to vex my Father,
‘who once, referring to the Moxhays,deserbed
them, sententiously but justly, as being “laorious, but it would he an exaggeration to say
Tappy, Christians.” Indeed, my memory petutes almost ll the“ saints” of that early time
‘ay sad and bumble souls, lacking vitality, yet
not complaining of anything definite. A quite
surprising number of them, it i trie, male
and female, suffered from diferent forms of
‘consumption, so thatthe Room rang in winter
‘evenings with a discord of hacking coughs,
But it seems to me that, when Twas quite
young, half the inhabitants ofour rural district

 
PATHER AND SON
‘were affected with phthisi, No doubt, our
peculist rligios community was more likely
to attract the feeble members of « population,
‘than to tempt the flush and the far

‘Miss Marks, patient pilgrim that she was,
socepted this quaint society without « mur.
‘nur, although T do not think it was much to
hier taste. But in a very short time it was
ssreetened to herby the formation ofa devoted
‘nd romantic friendship for one of the sisters,”
‘who was, indeed, if my childish recllection
oes not fail me, a very charming person.
‘The consequence of this enthusiastie alliance
‘was that I was earied into the bosom of the
family to which Miss Marks! new friend
Iblonged, and of these exellent people I must
give what picture 1 can. Almost opposite
the oom, therefore at the far end of the
village across one of the rare small gardens,
(in Which this frst winter I discovered with
rapture the magenta stars of a new flower,
hhepatica)—ashop-window displayed a thin row
of plates and dishes, cups and stucers; above
‘twas painted the name of Burmington. ‘This
china-shop was the property of three ompban
sisters Ain, Mary Grace, and Bess, the latter
lately married toa carpenter, who was“ elder
at our mecting; the other two, resolute old

 

 
FATHER AND SON
imide. Ann, whom have already mentioned,
hhad been one of the girls converted by the
Comish fishermen, She was about ten years
folder than Bess, and Mary Grace came half
‘way between them. Ann was a very worthy
‘woman, bat masterful and passionate, sufering
from an ungovernable temper, whieh at calmer
moments she used to refer to, not without
complacency, as “the sin which doth most
censly beset me". Bess was insignificant, and
vulgitised by domestic cares, But Mary
Grace was a delightful erenture

‘The Burmingtons lived in what was almost
the only old house surviving in the village,
Te was an extraordinary construction of two
storeys, with vast rooms, and winding passages,
tnd surprising changes of level. The sisters
‘were poor, but very industriows, and never in
anything like want; they sold, as T have sid,
‘crockery, and they took in washing, and did
Tittle fine needlework, and sold the produce of
great, vague garden at the back. In procest
of tine, the elder sisters took a young woman,
‘whose name was Drusilla Kliot, to live with
them as servant and companion ; she was
converted person, worshipping with a kindred
fect, the ible’ Christians. L remember
being much interested in hearing how Hess,

16

 

 
FATHER AND SON
before her mariage, became converted. Mary
Grace, on secount of her infirm, health, slept
‘lone in one room: in another, of vast size,
‘Stood family four-poster, where Ann sleptwith
‘Drusilla Fliott, and another bed in the samme
room took Bess. The sisters and their frend
had been constantly praying that Bess might
“find penee,” for she was sil w stranger to
salvation. Onenight, she suddenly called out,
‘ther erosly, * What ate you two whispering
about! Do go to sleep” to which Ann
replied: We are praying for you." “How do
‘you know,” answered Bess, that 1 don’
believe” And then she told them that, that
very night, when she was siting in the shop,
she had closed with God's offer of redemption.
Late in the night as it wes, Aan and Drosila
‘could dono less than go in and waken Mary
Grace, whom, however, they found aveake,
‘praying she too, for the conversion of Bess.
‘They told her the good news, and all four,
Ineling in the darkness, gave thanks aloud to
God for his infinite merey.

Te was Mary Grace Burmington who now
‘Became the romantic fiend of Miss Marks,
and a sort of seeond benevolence to me. She
mast ave been under thirty yeas of age; she
‘was very stall, and she was distresingly

 
FATHER AND SON
deformed in the spine, but she had an animated,
almost a sparkling countenance. When we
first urived in the village, Mary Grace was
‘only just recovering from gastzie fever which
Inn taken her close to the grave. remember
Ihering tht the vicar, a stont and pompous
‘man at whom we lays glared definnee, went,
jn Mary Grace’ supposed extremity, to the
urminigtons'shop-door, and shouted: Peace
be to this house," intending to offer his min
stations, but that Ann, who was in one ofher
tantrums, positively hounded him from the
doorstep and down the garden, in her pasionate nonconformity. Mary Grace, however,
‘recovered, and soon became, nat merely

Marks’ inseparable friend, but my Father's
spiritual factotum. He found it irksome to
visit the “stints” from honse to house, and
‘Mary Grace Burmington gladly assumed this
labour. She proveda most efficient coadjutor;
searched out, cherished and confirmed any of
those especially the young, who were attracted
bby my Fathers preaching, and for several
Years was « great joy and comfort to us al,
‘ven when her illness 50 increased that she
could no longer tise from her bed, she was a
‘entre of uifulness and cheerfulnes fram that
retreat, where she “received,” in a kind of

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
rustic state under «patchwork coverlid that
was like « basket of flowers,

‘My Father, ever releeting on what could be
done to confirm my spiritual vocation, to pin
me down, as it were, beyond any possibility of
scape, bethought him that it would accustom
Ime to what he called “ pastoral work in the
Lord's serves." if T accompanied Mary Grice
‘on her visite fiom house to house, If it
is remembered that I was onl eight and a half
‘when this veheme was caried into practice, it
will surprise no one to hear that it was not
crowned with succes. 1 disliked extremely
this wstaton of the poor. T felt shy, T ad
nothing to say, with dificulty could I under:
stand their sof Devonian patois, and most of
alla signal perhaps of my neurotic condition
<I dreaded ‘and loathed the smells of their
cottages. One hd to run over the whole
‘gumut of odours, some so faint that they
embraced the nostl with a fry iiss, others
bluntly gross, ofthe knock-you-down” order
some sweet, with a dreadful sourness; some
Bitter, with smack of rancid hai-oil. "There
‘were fine manly smells of the pigsty and the
‘open drain, and these prided themselves on
being all they seemed to be; but there were
also feminine odours, masquerading as you

 
FATHER AND SON
knew not what, in which penny whiff, vials of
ham and opoponsx, seemed to have become
tainted, vaguely, with the residue of the sloppail Tt was not T think, thet the villagers
‘ore particularly dirty, but those were days
before the invention of sanitary scienee, and
‘my poor young nose was morbidly, nay
ridiculously sensitive. T often came home
from visitng the saints” absolutely incapable
of eating the mill-sop, with brown sugar
strewn over it, which was my evening meal
‘There was one exception to my unwillingness to join in the pastoral Inbours of Mary
Grace. “When she announced, on a fineatter
noon, that we were going to Pavor and Barton,
Twas always agog to start. ‘These were two
hhamalets in our parish, and, 1 should suppose,
the original home of its population.  Pavor
‘was, even then, decayed almost to extinction,
‘but Barton preserved its desultory street of
ancient, detached cottages. Enoh, however
poor, had a wild garden round it, and, where
‘the inhabitants possessed some pride in their
surroundings, the roses and the jasmine and
‘atdistinguished ereeper,—which one ees nowhere at its best, but in’ Devonshire cottage
‘gusdens,—the stately cotoniaster, made the
whole place « bower. Barton was in vivid

 

 

 

   

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘contrast to our own harsh, open, squalid village,
with its mean modern houses its absence of
all vegetation, ‘The ancient thatched cottages
fof Barton were shut in by moist hill, and
femnopied by ancient tees; they were approached along a deep lane which was all a
‘wonder and a revelation to me that spring,
sine, in the very words of Shelley:

 

‘Gren cow hind andthe moolightealured May,
Av here lus a wht apy he
tee eyed nt yh a

‘Wiha td deve ang tn.

 

Around and beyond Barton there lay airyland. AIL was mysterious, unexplored, vieh
with infinite possiblities T should one day
‘enter it, the sword of make-believe in my
hand, the cap of courage on my head, * when
yyou are a hig boy,” said the orale of Mary
Grace, For the present, we had to content
‘ourselves with being an unadventurous couple
—alitle woman, hent half double, and a pe
ternaturally sedate small boy—as we walked
very slowly, side by side, conversing on terms
of high fumilarty, in which Biblia! and
colloquial phrases were quaintly jumbled,

    

 

 
FATHER AND SON
through the sticky red mud of the Pavor Ines
with Marton asa bourne before ss

When we came home, my Father would
sometimes ask mie for particulars.  Whete had
‘we been, whom Ihnd We found at home, what
testimony had those visited been able to ive
of the Lont’s goodness to them, what bad
‘Mary Grace repli in the way of exhortation,
reproof or condolence! These questions 1
hed at the time, but they were very useful
tome, since they gave me the habit ofeoncen‘rating my attention on what was going on in
the course of our visits, in ease T might be
called upon to give a report. My Father was
very kind in the matter; he cultivated my
powers of expression, he did not snub me
When I failed to be intelligent. But Toverheard Miss Marks and Mary Grave discussing
‘the whole question under the guise of refering
to “you know whom, not « hundred miles
hence" faneying that could not recognise
their little ostrich because its head was in «
tng of metaphor. I understood perfectly, and
‘gathered that they Both of them thought this
brusiness of my going into wndrained cottages
injudicions, “Accordingly, I was by degrees
taken “visting” only when Mary Grace was
‘going into the county-haralts, and then I was

 

 

  

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘usualy let outside, to skip among the flowers
‘and stall the butterflies,

T must not, however, underestimate the very
prominent prt taken all through this spring
find summer of 1858 by the collection of
specimens on the sea-shore, My Father had
returned, the chagrin of his fxiluse in theoising now being mitigated, to what was his
real work in life, the practical study of anienl
forms in detail. He wes nota biologist in the
true sense ofthe term. ‘That luminous ndieation whieh Flaubert gives of what the action
of the scientific mind should be, “affanchissint
esprit et pesant les mondes, sans bine, sans
pur, sans pig, sans amour et sans Dieu,” was
‘opposed in every segment to the attitude of
iy Father, who, nevertheless, was man of
‘very high scientific attainment. But, again T
repeat, he was not a philosopher: he was incxpable, by temperament and education, of
forming broad generalisations and. of escaping
Jn a vast survey from the troublesome peti=
ness of detail He suw everything throtgh a
Tens, nothing in the immensity of nature
‘Certain senses were absent in him; 1 chink
‘that, with all his justice, he had no conception
fof the importance of liberty; with all hi

ligence, the boundaries of the atmosphere

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
in whieh his mind could think st all_ were
‘always close about him: with al is hit the
Word of God, he had no confidence in the
Divine Benevolence; and with all his pass
‘ate piety, he habitually mistook fear for love,
‘e'was down on the shore, tramping along
the pebbled terrces of the beach, clambering
cover the great blocks of fallen conglomerate
Which broke the white curve with rufous
Dromontories that jutted into the sea, of,
finally, bending over those shallow tidal pools
in the limestone rocks which were our proper
Ihunting-ground,—it as in sch cieumstances
‘as these that my Father became most easy,
happy. most human, ‘That aed ok
cross his brows, which it westied me to see,
‘the look that came from sleepless ansiety of
conscience, faded away, and left the dark
countenance still always stem indeed, but
sereneand unupbraiding. ‘Those pools were our
‘mirrors, ia which, reflected in the dark hyaline
and framed by the sleek and shining fronds
‘of oarweed, there used to appear the shapes
fof « middle-aged man and a funny little boy,
‘equally eager, and, I elmost find the presumption to say, equally well prepared for business,
IF any one goes down to those shores
now, if man or boy seeks to follow in our

 

 

  

 

 
FATHER AND SON
traces, let him relive at once, before he takes
‘the trouble to roll up his sleeves, tht his zeal
will end in lubour lost. ‘There is nothing,
how, where in our days there was x0 much,
‘Then the rocks between tide and tide were
submarine gardens of a beauty that seemed
‘often to be fabulous, and was positively deli
sive, since if we delicately hited the weed
‘curtains of a windless pool, though we might
for a moment see its sides and floor pave
with living blossoms, ivory-white, roy-ned,
‘orange and amethyst, yet all that. panoply
would melt away, furled into the hollow rock,
if we so much as dropped a pebble in to
‘disturb the magie dream.

Hilf a century ago, in. many parts of the
‘osst of Devonshire and Cornsall, where the
Timestone at the water's edge is wrought into
‘revices and hollows, the tideline was, like
‘Keats’ Grecian vase, “a still unravished bride
‘of quietness.” ‘These cups and basins were
always fal, whether the tide was high or love,
‘andthe only way in which they were affected
vas that twice inthe twenty-four hours they
‘wore replenished by cold streams from the
‘great Se, and then twice were left brimming
1 be vivilied by the temperate movement of
‘the upper air. ‘They were living flower-beds,

   

 

 
 

FATHER AND SON
s0 exquisite in their perfection, that my
Father, in spite of his scientific requirements,
ted not seldom to pause before he began to
rifle them, ejaculating that it was indeed a
pity to disturb such congregated beauty.
‘The antiquity of these rock-pools, and the
Infinite suecesion of the soft and radiant
forms, senanemones, sea-weeds, shells, fishes,
which had inbabited them, undisturbed since
the eretion of the word, used to occupy my
Father’ faney. We burt in, he used to say,
where no one had ever thought of intruding
before; and if the Garden of Eden had boen
situate in Devonshire, Adam and Eve,
‘stepping Tightly down to. bathe in the
rinbow-colourel spray, would have seen the
identical sights thet we now saw,—the seat
prawns gliding like transparent launches,
‘antica waving in the twilight its thick white
waxen tentacles, and the Tronds of the dulse
faintly streaming on the water, like huge
red banners in some reverted atmosphere,

‘Al this is long over, and done with. ‘The
ring of living beauty drawn about out shores
was avery thin and fingile one. Tt had
existed all those centuries solely in consequence
of the indifference, the blissful ignorance of
‘man, These rock-basns, fringed by eorllines,

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘led with still water almost as pellucid as
the upper air itself, thronged with beautiful
sensitive forms of life—they exist no lange
they are all profaned, and empty
volgarised. “An army of “collectors” has

‘over them, and ravage every comer of
‘hem. ‘The fairy paradise has been violated,
the exquisite product of centuries of natural
selection hus been crushed under the rough
pew of wellimeaning, idle-minded curiosity.
‘Phat my Father, himself so reverent, 50
‘conservative, hud by the popularity of his
‘books sequired the direct responsibilty for a
calsmity thit he had never anticipated,
became clear enough to himself before many
years had passed, and eost him grest chagrin,
‘No one wil see again on the shore of England
what I suw in my early childhood, the
Submusine vision of dark rocks, speckled and
Starred with an infinite variety of eolour, and
Streamed over by silken flags of royal crimson
‘nd purple,

In reviving these impressions, Iam unable
to give ay exact chronologieal sequence to
them, ‘These particular adventures began
carly in 1858, they reached their greatest
intensity in the summer of 1859, and they did
rot altogether cease, so far as my Father was

 

  

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘concerned, until nearly twenty. years Inter.
‘But it was while he was composing what, as I
fam told by scientiio’ men of to-day, com
tinues to be his most valuable contribution to
knowlege, his “ History of the British Sea‘Anemones and Corals” that we worked toiether on the shore for definite purpose, and
the lst instalment of tt stil-elasie volume
‘was ready for press by the close of 1899.

‘The way in which my Father worked, in
his most desperate escapades, war to. wade
‘reastsigh into one af the huge pools, and
examine the worm-esten surface of the rock
hove and below the brim, In such remate
places-spots where I could never venture,
Deing lef, © slightly timorous Andromeda,
cchined to a safer level of the eliff—in these
fextreme sins, there used often to Turk @
‘marvellous profusion of animal and vegetable
forms. My Father would. search for the
roughest and most corroded points of rock,
those offering the bost refuge for avatety of
‘reatures, and would then chse of fragments
as low down in the water ashe could. These
Pieces of rock were instantly plunged in the
Salt water of jars which we lad brought with
tus for the purpose. When as much had
‘een collect ah we could extry away —my

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Pather always dragged about an immense
square basket, the ereak of whose handles T
fn stil faney thst’ 1 hear—we tuned to
trudge up the Tong climb home. ‘Then all
four prizes were spread out, face upward, in
shallow pans of clean seawater,

Tia few hours, when all drt had subsided,
and what living’ erestures we had brought
‘seemed to have recovered their composure, my
work began. My eyes wereextremely Keen and
povreeful, though they were vexatiously neat‘Sighted. OF no use in examining objets at
ny distance, in investigating a minute surface
‘my vsion was trained to be invaluable. "The
sallow pan, with our spoils, would rest on &
table near the window, and I, kneeling on &
air opposite the light, would lean over the
suréice till everything was within an inch oF
‘wo of my eyes. Often T bent, in my zeal, so
far forward that the water touched the tip of
‘my nose and gave me a litle iy shock. In
this atitade-—an idle spectator might have
formed the impression that Twas trying to
wath my head and could not quite summon
‘up resolution enough to plunge—in this odd
pose F would remain for & long time, holding
fy breath, and examining with extreme care
every stom of rook, every swisl of detritus

189

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘This was a task which my Father could only
perform by the help of a lens, with which, of
‘oun, he took care to supplement my examination. But that: my survey was of use, he
‘kas himsel? most Iandsomely testified i. his
*Aetinologa Britannes,” where he expresses
his debt to the “keen and well-practised eye
of my little son. boasting is not to
be excluded, is it every eminent biologist,
‘every proud and masterful ELS. who can
lay his hand on. his heart and swear Ut,
before reaching the age of ten yeas, he Ind
‘added, not merely « new species, but « new
genus to the British fauna. That, however,
‘the author of these pages ean do, who on
‘Tune 29, 1859, discovered « tiny atom,—and
‘ran in the greatest agitation to announce the
Aiscovery of that object “as a form with
Which he was unaequsinted"—which figures
nee then on all lists of sea-anemones a5
lia murocincta, or the walled corklet.
‘Alas! that so fair a swallow should. have
‘made no biologieal summer in afterlife.
‘These delicious agitations by the edge of
‘the salt sea wave must have greatly improved
hhowever was still looked
loaded with conts and
comforters, and strolled out between Mist

 

 

   

 

  
FATHER AND SON
‘Marks and Mary Grace Burmington, mafted
Dall of flannel. This alone was enough to
giveme a look af delicacy, which the sunt,”
in thelr blunt way, maude no seruple of com
‘menting upon to my face, Twas greatly
impresed by « conversation held over my bed
fone evening by the servants. Our cook, Susan,
1 person of enormous size, and Kate, the tattng, iesome parlour-maid who waited upon:
tus, on the summer evening 1 speak of were
standing-—1 eannot tell why—on each side of
my bed. Tshut my eyes, and lay quite stil,
jn order to escape conversing with them, and
‘they spoke to ene another. Ab, poo lamb,”
Kate suid trivially, “Aes not long for this
world; going home to Jesus, he is,—in a ji,
T should say by the look of un.” But Susan
answered: Not so. I dreamed about ‘un,

  

 

  

for missionary service,
‘repented Kate, impressed.“ Yes.”
‘on, with solemn emphasis, “hell blecd for his
‘Lord in heathen parts, that's what the future
Ihave in store for in.” When they were gone,
beat upon the coverid with my fists, and
1 determined that whatever happened, 1 would
not, not, not, go out to preach the Gospel
among horrid, tropical niggers
fc) .

  

 
CHAPTER Vit

1 the history of an infiney so cloistered and
uniform as mine, such a real adventure as my
being publicly and successfully. kidnapped
cannot be overlooked. "There were several
“innocents” in our village, armless eeoentres
who had more or less unquestionably crossed
the barrier which divides the sine from the
insane. They were not discouraged by public
‘opinion: indeed, several of them were favoured
Deings, suspected by my Father af exaggerating
their mental density inorder to escape having
to work, like dogs, who, as we al know, could
speak as well as we do, were they not afiaid
Gf being made to fetch and carry, Mise Mary
Faw was not one ofthese mbeciles. She was
what the French eal a detraguies she had
exjoyed a good intelligence and an ativemindy
but her wits had left the rails and were
eareering about the country. Miss Flaw was
the daughter of a retired” Baptist: minister,

 

 

 
PATHER AND SON
pay ogee eae
tees 6 ile eltary hous Mh up at
oe ae ay One Gt
Pee ee ol
[oF insert
lees del peated
Joi groileenmep tifa)
parietal

Sih chapel
ny hough return Itinel an they
lotta to he hgh abots of ln Fle
pg tina he ranted
Pee toes! oe ag,
bat the cham of the pace was « mmmee™
oe
ee eee ene
Bale eet te ap asc
Tels Gk pt thee wes dome e's
ps allo sori play
Mey: ow orale leh heen lows
eet ae oe
eh che at

Tdalghod i te ys to Mary Flaw
eee ee ree
Ls erg anal ad
oni osetryh rma inde le

‘=

  

 

 

ting,

 

 
FATHER AND SON
which T thought infinitely graceful, to the
cowry-shell hover, where she would regale us
with Devonshire cream and with small hagd
Biveuits that were like pebbles. The oonverstton of Mary Flaw was a grent test to
Ime. Lenjoyed its iregulaiies, ts wayward
ness it was like a tune that wandered into
several Leys. As Mary Grace Burmington put
it, one never knew what dear Mary Flaw
‘would say next, and that she did not herself
Know added to the charm, She had become
crized, poor thing, in consequence of a
Alsappointment in Tove, but of eoarse T did
fot know thst, nor that she was ernaed at all,
T thought her brillant and original, and 1
Tiked her very much. In the light of eoming
‘events, it would be affectation were 1 to
pretend that she did not feel «similar
Partaity for me,

Miss Flaw wens, from the first, devoted to
my Father's minstrations, and it was part of
fur odd village indulgence that no one ever
dreamed of preventing her from coming to
‘the Room. On Sunday evenings the bulk of
‘the audience was aranged on forms, with backs
tw them, set in the middle ofthe floor, with «
pesage round them, while other forms wene
placed against Une walls. My Father preached

   

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
from a lectem, facing the audience. If dark‘ness came on in the course of the service,
Richard Moxhay, glimmering in his cream
‘white corduroy, used to go. slowly round,
lighting groups of tallow candles by the help
‘of a box of Tucifers. Mary Flaw always
fssumed the place of honour, on the left
extremity of the front bench, immediately
‘opposite my Father. Miss Marks and Mary
Grace, with me ensconced and almost buried
between them, occupied the right of the same
bench. While the lighting proceeded, Mis
law used to diect it fom her seat, silently,
by pointing out to Moxhay, who took no
notice, what groups of eandles he should Tight
next. She did this jst as the clown in the
reus directs the grooms how to move the
furniture, and Moxhay psid no more attention
‘to her than the grooms do to the lown. Miss
Flaw bad another peculiarity : she silently
went through a service exactly similar to ours,
‘but much briefer. ‘The coune of our evening
service was this My Fathee prayed, and we
all knelt down; then he gave out a hyn
fand most of us stood up to sing’ then he
preached for about an hour, while we sat and
Tistened ; then w hymn again, then prayer and
the valediction.

   

   

 

 

165
FATHER AND SON

‘Mary Flaw went through this ritual, but on
‘asmalierseale. We all knelt down together,
‘bat when we rose from our knees, Mist Flaw
‘was already standing up, and was pretending,
without @ sound, to sing « hymn; in the
midst of our hymn, she sat down, opened her
ible, found a text, and then leaned back, hor
‘ees fixed in space, listening to an imaginary
sermon, which our own real one soon eanght
up, and coineided with for about three-quarters
‘of an hour. ‘Then, while our sermon went
peacefully on, Miss Flaw would 1se, and sing
In silence (if am permitted to use such an
‘expresion) her own visionary hyen then she
‘would kneel down and pray, then rs, collet
hher belongings, and sweep, in fairy majesty,
‘out of the chapel, my Father still rounding
Is periods from the pulpit. Nobody ever
‘thought of preventing these movements, oF of
checking the poor creature in her innocent
fightiness, until the evening of the grest

 

 

‘own fault. Mary Flaw had
Snished her imaginary service earlier than
tesual She had stood up alone with her hymn
book before hers she had flung herself on her
knees alone, in the attitude of devotion ; she
‘uadrisen; she had sented herself for a moment
FATHER AND SON
‘to put on her gloves, and to collet her Bible,
her hymn-books and her pocket handkerchief
in her reticule. She was ready to start, and
‘she looked around her with a pleasant sir? my
Father, all undisturbed, booming away mean
hile over our hexds. {know not why the
rmanceuvres of Miss Flaw especially attracted
tme that evening, but I leaned ot across Miss
Marks and I caught Miss Flaws eye. She
nodded, I nodded; and the amazing deed
‘was done, 1 hardly: know how. Miss’ Flaw,
with incredible sites, flew along the line,
plucked me by the eoat-colla from between
my paralysed protectresses, darted with me
down the chapel and out into the dark, before
‘any one hd time to say * Jack Robinson.”
My Father gazed from the pulpit and the
stream of exhortation withered onhislips. No
tne in the body of the audience stined no
fone but himself had clearly sect wht had
Tuppened. Vague rows of snints” with
‘gaping countenances stared up at him, while
heshouted, Will nobody stop them "ns we
whisked out through the doorway. Forth into
‘the moist night we went, and up the lampless
village, where, a few minutes later, the
swiftest of the congregation, with my Father
At their head, found ws sitting on the door:
16

 

  
FATHER AND SON
step of the butcher's shop. My captor was
now suite quiet, and made no objection to
ry quiting her," without © single kiss oF
1 good-bye,” asthe poot says

‘Although T had seareely felt frightened at
the time, doublles my nerves were shaken by
this esexpade, and it may hnve had something
to do with the recurrence of the distressing
visions from which I had suffered as a very
Title child. These came buck, with a foree
and expansion de to my inerensed maturity.
Thad hardly Isid my head down on te pill
‘than, as it seemed to me, Twas taking part in
‘4 mad gallop through spice. Some force,
‘which had tight hold of me, so that felt my=
self an atom in its grasp, was hurrying me on,
‘over an endless slender bridge, under which
fn either side a loud torrent rushed at
vertginows depth below. At fst our helpless
flight,—for I'was bound hand and foot like
‘Mazeppa,—proceeded in straight line, but
presently it began to eurve, and we miced and
roared along, in what gradually became a
‘monstrous vortex, reverberant ‘with noses,
Toud with light, while, a4 we  procetded
‘enormous concentsie circles engulfed us, xh
‘wheeled above and about us. It seemed ax
wwe, that is, and the undefined free which

168

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
carried me-—were pushing feverishly on
towards goal which our whole concentrated
‘energies were bent on reaching, but whieh
frenzied despa in my heart told me we never
could reach, yet the attainment of which alone
ould save us from destruction. Far away,
in the pulsation ofthe great luminous whorls,
T coold jast see that goal, a ruby-coloured
point waxing and waning, and i bore, or to
be exact it consisted of, the letters ofthe word
Canine.

“This ogitating vision recurred night after
night, and led me with inexpresible distress.
‘The details of italtered very ttle, and T knew
what Thad to expect when I exept into bed.
T knew that for few minutes T should be
battling with the ell ofthe linen sheets, snd
faying to keep awake, but that then, without
pause, I should slip into that terrible realm
‘of storm and strest in which Twas bound hand
tnd foot, and sent galloping through infinity.
Often have I wakened, with unutterable joy,
to find my Father and Miss Marks, whots my
seeamns had disturbed, standing one on each
Side of my bed. "They eould release me from
‘my nightmare, whieh seldom esuled me
tie «night, bat how to preserve me from its
‘origintl attack passed their understanding. My

i)

 
FATHER AND SON
‘Father, in his tenderness thought to exorcise
‘te demon by prayer. He would appear inthe
Ded-room, just as I was first slipping into bed,
find he would kneel at my side, ‘The light
from a candle on the mantel self streamed
down upon his dark head of hair while his face
‘was buried in the eoverid from which « loud
voice came up, alittle muffled, hegging that
might be preserved aguinstall the evil spirits
‘that wall in darkness and thatthe deep might
not sallow me up.

"This litle ceremony gave «distraction tomy
‘thoughts, and may have been useful in that
way. But it led’ to an unfortanate cireumStance My Father hegan to enjoy these
orisons at my bedside, and to prolong them,
Perhaps they lasted a little too long, but 1
contrived to keep awake through them, some:
times by x great effort. On one unhappy
night, however, I gave even worse offence
than Slumber would have given. My Father
‘was praying aloud, in the attitude T have deferibed, and Twas balf sitting, half ying in
bbe, with the clothes sloping from my chin
Suddenly a rather large insect, dark and Mat,
with more legs thin a selespecting insect
‘ought to need, appeared at the bottom of the

counterpane, and slowly advanced. 1 think

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
it was nothing worse than wheetle. It walked
suceessfally past my Father’ sleek black ball
fof head, and climbed stright up at
nearer, nearer, til it seemed all a twinkle of
thors and joints 1 ore iti silent fascination
till it almost tickled my chin, and then I
sereamed “Papa! Papa!" My Father rose
in grett dudgeon, removed the insect (what
‘were insects to him!) and then gave me a
tremendous lecture

The sense of desperation which this incident
produced I shall not easily forget. Life
seemed really to be very harusing when to
visions within and beetles without there was
Joined the consciousness of having grievously
‘offended God hy an act of disrespect. It is
dificult for me to justify to myself the violent
jobation which my Father yave me in conequence of my scream, except by attributing
to him something of the human weakness of
vanity. Teannot help thinking that he ike
to hear himself speak to God in the presence
‘of an admiring’ listener. “He prayed with
fervour and animation, in pure Johsonian
English, and Uhope Tam not undutful if 1
‘add my impression that he was not displeased
‘with the sound of his own devotions. My
ry for help had needlesly, as he thought,

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
broken in upon this holy and seemly perform
ance. “You, the child of a naturalist,” he
retnasked in avtesome tones,“ you to protend
to feel terror at the advance ofan insect #” Tt
could but be a pretext, he declared, for avoiding the testimony of faith in prayer. “If your
heart were fixed, if it panted after the Lord,
would take more than the movements of
Dectle to make you distueb oral supplication
At His fotstool. Beware! for God is jealous
God and He consumes them in wrath who
make a nose like « dog”

My Father took st all times a singular
pleasurein repeting that our God ea jealous
God." He liked the word, which T suppose
Fheused inan antiquated sense. le was aco
‘tomed to tell the “saints” ot the room,—in a
very genial manner, and smiling at them as he
sid it—"T am jeslous over you, my beloved
‘brothers and sistas, with a golly jealousy.”
know that this was interpreted by some of the
saints,—for Uheard Mary Grace say so to Miss
‘Mark—as meaning that my Father was resentful becnuse some of them attended the
service at the Wesleyan chapel on ‘Thursday
evenings: But my Father was utterly ineapable of such litleness as this, and when he
talked of “jealousy” he meant a lofty

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
solicitade, «careful watchfulness. He meant
‘that their spiritual honour was a matter of
anxiety to him, No doubt when he used to
tll me to remember that our God isa jealous
God, he meant that my sins and shortcomings
‘were not matters of indifference to the Divine
ing. But I think, looking back, that it was
‘ery extmondinary fur aman, so instructed and
50 intelligent as he, to dwell so much on the
possible anger ofthe Lord, rather than on his
Pity and love. The theory of extreme Puri{anism can surely offer no quainter example of
its fallacy than this idea thst. the omnipotent
Jehovah could be seriously offended, and eould
‘stoop to revenge, becuse alittle, nervous child
fof nine had disturbed © prayer by being
Fightenod at an insect.

"The fhet thatthe word “ Carmine " appeared
ts the goal of my visionary pursuits isnot 50
inexplicable as it may seem. My Father was
At this time producing numerous water-colour
Arwwings of minute and even of microscopic
forms fife. ‘These he exceuted in the manner
‘of miniature, with an amazing Gdelty of form
and with a brilianey of colour which remains
lunfaded after fity years. By far the most
costly of his pigments was the intense ermson,
‘which is manufactured out of the very spirit

 

   
FATHER AND SON
and essence of cochinesl. I had lately become
‘fervent imitator of his works of at, and T
vas allowed to use all of his colour, except
fone; Twas strictly forbidden to let « hair of
‘my punt-brush touch the litle broken mast of
carmine which was all that he posessed. We
believed, but T do. not know whether this
could be the fat, that carmine of this saperlative quality was sold at a guinen a cake,
“Carmine,” therefore, became my shibboleth
‘of sel indulgence: it was a symol of all that
taste and art and wealth could combine to
produce. T imagined, for instance, that at
Belshuzzar’s feast, the loftiestépergne of gold,
surrounded by flowers and jewels, earied the
Imonarch’s proudest possesion, «cake of
carmine. knew of no object in the world of
loxury more desirable than this, and its obses
sion in my waking hours is quite enough, 1
think, to account for exemine ” having been
the torment of my dreams.

"he little incident of the beatle displays my
Father's mood at this period in its worst ight,
lis severity was not very creditable, perhaps,
tw his good sense, but without a Word of
explanation it may seem even more wnreasonable than it was, My Father might have been
Jess stern to my lpses from high conduct, and

 

 

 

   

 
FATHER AND SON
my own mind at the same time less armoured
against is arrows, if our relations had heen
those which exist in an ordinary religions
family. He would have been more indulgent,
and my own allections might nevertheles
hhave been more easily alienated, i Thad been
treated by him as « commonplace child, standfe yet outside the pale of conscious
Christianity. “But he bad formed the idea,
and cultivated it nsiduously, that Twas an
Ane «elite, «being to whom the mysteries of
salvation had been divinely revealed and. by
‘whom they had beon accepted. I was, to his
partial faney, one in whom the Holy Ghost
thud already’ performed « real and. permanen
work. Hence, I was inside the pale; 1 had
attained that inner position whieh divided, as
‘we tied to sty, the Sheep from the Goats,
Anotherlttle boy might be very well behaved,
Dut if he had not consciously “laid hold on
Crist," his good deeds, so far, were absolutely
tiselest, Whereas T might be a very naughty
boy, and require much chastisement from God
and man, but nothing—so my Father thought
could invalidate my election, and sooner oF
later. perhaps even after many stripes, I must
inevitably be brought hack to a state of grace.
"The paradox between thie unquestionable
Me

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
snetfieaton by faith and my equally unquestionsble naughtines, occupied my Father
igreatly at this time. "He made ita frequent
‘subject of intercession at family prayers, not
caring to hide from the servants misdeIeanours ofmine, which he spread outwith
‘© melancholy unction before the Lord. He
cultivated the belief that ll my litle ailment,
all my aches and pains, were sent to comect
tay faults, He carried this persuasion very
far, even putting this exhortation before,
Instead of after, an instant relie of my sulle
ings. If I bumed my finger with a sulphur
tateh, or pinched the end of my nose in the
door (to mention but two sorrows that reeur
to my memory), my Father would solemnly
ejaculate: “O may these afflictions be much
sanctified to him!” before offering any remedy
for my puin, So that I almost longed, under
the pressure of these pangs, to be s godless
child, who had never known the privileges of
saving grace, since I argued that such a ehild
‘would be subjected to none of the sufferings
‘hich seemed to assail my path.

‘What the ideas or conduct of “another
child” might be T had, however, t this time
to ides, for, stange as it may sound, T had
not, until my tenth year was far advanced,

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘made acquaintance with any such creature
‘The “saints” had children, but Twas not
called upon to coltivate their company, and 1
Tad not the slightest wish to do so, But
aly in 1850 T was allowed, at last, to
fasoeiate with « child af my own age. 1 do
‘ot reall that this permission gave me any
rapture; I accepted it philosophically, but
‘without that delighted eagerness which T
‘might have been expected to show. My
‘carlest companion, then, was & litle boy of
almost exactly my own age. His name was
Benny, which no doubt was short for
Benjamin. His surname T have forgotten,
‘bot his mother—T think he had no father—
‘was a solemn and shadowy lady of means who
lived in a villa, which was older and much
Inger than our, on the opposite side of the
oud, Going to“ play with Benny” involved
‘8 small public excursion, and this T wis
now allowed to make by myself—an immense
source of selfespect.

‘Everything in my little memories seems to
un askew; obviously 1 ought to have been
‘extremely stived and Browdened by this
‘earliest sociation with « boy of my own age!
Yet I eannot truly sey that it wasso. Benny's
other possessed what seemed to me a vast

 

 
FATHER AND SON
domsin, with lawns winding among broad
shrubberies, and a kitehen-gatden, with aged
fuit-trees in it.The ripeness of this place,
‘monsed and leafy, was gratifying to my senses,
fon hich the rawness of our own bald garden
jared. There was an old brick wall between
the two divisions, upon which it was possible
for us to climb up, and from this we gained
Piagah-views which were prodigious please,
But Thad not the faintest ides how to
play”: Thad never leamed, hd never heard
fof any “games.” I thinke Benny must have
lacked initiative almost as much as 1 did
We walked about, and shook the bushes, and
climbed along the wall; T think that as
almost all weever did do. And, sully enough,
TTeannot recover ® phrase from Benny’ lips
noran action, nora gesture although Tremember quite clearly how some grown-up people of
that time looked, and the very words they said.

For example, I recollect Miss Wilkes very
distinctly, since I studied her with great deTiherstion, and with « suspicious watebfulness
that was above my years. In Miss Wilkes a
type that hd hitherto been absolutely unfamiliar to us obtruded upon our experience.
{nour Evoless Eden, Woman, if not exactly
Jireuta et lorrida, bad always been *of a

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘certain age.” But Miss Wilkes was a comparatively young thing, and she advanced not
by any means unconseious of her charms. All
was feminine, all was impulsive, about Miss
‘Wilkes; every gesture seemed eloquent with
ignlish innocence and the playful dawn df lit.
Th actual years T faney she was not 30
‘extremely youthful, sinoe she was the respon
sible and trusted head-mistress of «large
boaring-school for gies, but in her heart the
Joy of life ran high, Miss Wilkes had a smal,
round face, with melting eyes, and when she
ited her head, her ringlets seemed to vibrate
tnd shiver lke the bells of pagoda. She had
charming way of claping her hands, and
holding them against her bodice, while she
said, O,but—really now t” in a manner ines:
pressibly engaging. She was very earaest, and
She ad's pleading way of calling ont "0 but
fren you teasing me?” which would have
brought «tiger fawning to her erinline,
“After we had spent a fll year without any
social distractions, it seems that our circle of
qunintances had now begun to extend in
‘spite of my Fathers unvwillingnes to visit his
‘eighbours, He was a fortress that required
to be stormed, but there was considerable
Jal curiosity about him, so that by-and-by
i

 

 

   
FATHER AND SON
cscalading parties were formed, some of which
‘were partly succesful. In the fist place,
Carles Kingsley had never hesitated to come,
from the beginning, ever since our arrival,
re had reason to visit our neighbouring town
rather froquently, and on such occasions he
slways marched ap and attacked us Tt
‘was extmordinary how persistent he was, for
my Father must have been « very. trying
friend. I vividly recollect that sort of cross
examination of would-be communeants was
ting on in ou half furnished draw
fone week-day morning, when Mz. Kingsley
‘was announced; my Father, in stentorian
tones, replied: “Tell Mr. Kingsley that Tama
engaged in examining Seripture with certain
of the Lord’ children.” And I, little later
kneeling at the window, while the candidates
were being dismissed with prayer, watehed the
tuthor of“ Hypatin” nervously eareering about
the garden, very restless and impatient, yet
preferring this ignominy to the chanee ofloing
my Father's company altogether. Kingsley,
‘2 daving spirit, used sometimes to drag us out
ttavling with him in Torbay, and slehough his
hae’'s beak and rattling voive tightened me
Title, his was always a jolly presence that
brougt some refreshment to our seriousness.

 

 

 

 

  
 

 

 
FATHER AND SON

But the other visitors who came in
‘Kingsley’ wake and without his excuse, how
they disturbed us! We used to be seated,
iy Father at his miroseope, I with my map
fr book, in the down-stais room we called
the stady. "There would be «hush around us
in which you could hear « ser-anemone sigh.
‘Then, abruptly, would come ring atthe front
oor; my Father would bend at me a coreufgeted brow, and murmur, under his breath,
‘What's that” and then, atthe sound of foot:
steps, would bolt into the verandah, snd round
the garden into the potting-shed. If it was no
Visitor more serious than the postman or the
tax-gatherer, sed to go forth and coax the
timid wanderer home. If i was a caller,
above all « female elle, it was my privilege
to prevarente, remarking innocently that
“Papa is out!”

Into  puridise so. carefully guarded, 1
Know not how that serpent Miss ‘Wilkes
could penetrate, but there she was. She

‘broke read” with the Brethren at the
adjacent town, from which she extried oa
Steategical movements, which were, up to a
certain point highly successful. She professed
herself deeply interested in microscopy, and
desired that some of her young ladies should

  

 

 

 
PATHER AND SON
study it also, She came attended by an
‘unimportant mamma, and by pupils to whom
T had sometimes, very unwillingly, to show
cour “nature objects” ‘They would invade
tus, and ll our quietness with chattering
noise; T could bear none of them, and T wat
singularly dewwn to Mise Marks by finding
that she dshiked them too,

By whatever arts she worked, Miss Wilkes
certainly achieved a certain’ aseendeney.
‘When the knocks came st the front door, I
twas now instructed to see whether the visitor
were not she, before my Father bolted to the
potting-shed. She was an untiring listener,
‘and my Father had « genius for instruction
Miss Wilkes was never weary of expressing
what a revelation of the wonderful works of
God in creation her acquaintance with vs had
been. She would gaze through the mieroseope
at avefal forms, and would persevere until the
silver sim which marked the eonfines of the
Arop of water under inspection would ripple
‘wands with a flash of light and vanish,
Deeause the drop itself had evaporated.
“Wall, F ean only say, how marvellous are
‘Thy doings!" was a Frequent ejaculation of
Miss Wilkes, and’ one that was very well
received, She Teamed the Latin names of

  

  
FATHER AND SON
‘many of the species, and it seems quite
pathetic to me, looking back, to realise hove
‘uch trouble the poor woman took. She
‘as the expression is, upon my
ry word, and one instance of this
Ted to a eertain revelation
‘My Father, who had an extraordinary way
‘ofsaying anything that eame up into his mind,
stated one day,—the fashions, T must suppose,
Deing under discassion,--that he thought white
the only becoming colour fora lady's stockings.
‘The stockings of Miss Wilkes had up to that
hour been of» deep violet, but she wore white
ones in future whenever she came to our house
"This dalicuey would have been beyond my
‘unaided infant observation, but I heard. Mis
‘Marks mention the matter, in terms which
they supposed to he secret, fo her confidante,
‘and 1 ered it at the ancles of the lady.
‘Miss Marks continued by saying, in confidence,
‘and “quite as between you and me, dear
‘Mary Grace," that Miss Wilkes was a mins.’
Th the greatest curiosity about words, and
as this was a new one, I Iooked it up in our
large English Dictionary, ut there the defintion of the term was this:—" Minx: the
female of minnock ; = pert wanton.” I was
‘as much inthe dark as ever.

     

 

 

 

    

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Whether she was the female of « minnocle
(Gehatever that may be) of whether she was
only 1 very well meaning schoolmisteess desirous of enlivening a monotonous existence,
Miss Wilkes certainly took sont of ourselves
good deal. Did my Father know what
anger he rant It was the opinion of Miss
‘Marks and of Macy Grace that he did not
‘and in the back-ktchen, » room which served
those Indies as a. private orstory in. the
summertime, much prayer was olfered up
that his eyes might be opened ere it was 400
Tate. But I am inclined to think that they
‘were open all the time, that, at all events, they
‘were what the French call entroucert, that
‘enough ight for practical purposes came sifted
in through his eyelashes. At a later time,
‘being reminded of Miss Wilkes, he said with a
certain complaisance, Ah, yes! she profered
‘much entertainment during my widowed
years!” He wsed to go down to her boarding
ehool the garden of which had been the seene
‘ofa murder, and was romantically situated on
‘the edge of « quaitied elif; he always took
sme with him, and kept me at his side all
through these visits, notwithstanding Mis
Wilkes’ solicitude that the fatigue and exitement would be too much for the dear

  

 

 
FATHER AND SON
chi’ strength, unless I rested w Tittle on the
parlour sofa.

“About this time, the question of my
eduestion came up for discussion inthe house
hold, as indeed it well might. Miss Marks
Ind long. proved practically inadequate inthis
respect her slender aequirements evaporsting,
suppose, lke the drops of water under the
ricroscope, while the field of her general
duties became wider, ‘The subjects in. which
T took pleasure, and upon which I possessed
ooks, Fsedulously taught myself; the other
subjects, which formed the vast majority, 1
id not learn at all. Like Aurora Leigh,
‘expecially zoology, botany anu astronomy, but
with the explicit exception of geology, which
‘my Father regarded as tending directly to
the encouragement of infidelity. T copied a
‘great quantity of maps, and read all the books
‘of travels that I could find. But I ecquired no
mathematics, no laguages, no history so that
T was in danger of gross illiteracy i these
important departments.

My Father grudged the time, but he felt
it duty to do something to dll up these
deficiencies, and we now started Latin, in a

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Title eghteenth-contury reading-book, out
‘of which my Grandfather had been taught
Tt consisted of strings of words, and of grim
arrangements of conjunetion and declenion, presented in manner appalingly unattractive. used to be set down in the
study, under my Father's eye, learn «solid
pige of this compilation, while he verote oF
Dinted, ‘The window would be open in
summer, and my seat was close to it. OutSide, a bee was shaking the clemats-blossom,
‘or & red-admiral butterfly was opening and
shutting his wings on the hot eonerete of the
‘verandah, oF «blackbird was racing seross the
lan. Tt was almost more Un human nature
could bear to have to sit holding up to my
face the dreary Tittle Latin book, with i
sheepskin cover that smelt of mildewed paste,
Bat out of this strength there eame an un
expected sudden sweetness. ‘The exerise of
hearing me repeat my strings of nouns and
verbs had revived in my Father his memories
Of the:classien In the old solitary years, «
Tong time ago, by the shores of Canadian
rapids, on the edye of West Indian swamps,
his Vigil had teen an inestimable solace to
fo extremely devout persons, there is
something objectionable in most ofthe great

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
writers of antiquity. Home, Lucret
"Terence, Catllus, Juventl,—in each there i
cone quality or snother definitely repulsive to
f reader who is determined to know nothing
but Christ and him emucifed. From time
Immemorial, however, it has been recognised
jn the Christian church that” this objection
docs not apply to Virgil. He is the most
‘evangelical of the classes; he is the one who
‘ean be enjoyed with least to explain evay and
Teast to excuse. One evening my Father
took down his Vigil from aa upper shel, and
his thoughts wandered sray from surrounding
things; he travelled in the past again. ‘The
book was « Delphin edition of 1708, which
‘nad followed him in all his wanderings: there
vas great seratch on the sheep-skin cover that
‘thors had made inaforestof Alubams. And
‘then, in the twilight, ase shut the volume at
Ist, oblivious of my presence, he began to
‘murmur and to chant the adorable verses by
‘memory.
‘ye aes wii vb opie,
the warble; and I stopped my play, and
listened as if to nightingale, tll he reached
‘a; Tyr ta on
oman rae duces Anus

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
0 Pape, what is that?” 1 could not prevent myself from asking. He translated the
vvenes, he explained their meaning, but his
exporition gave me little interest. What to
me was besutifol Amuryllis? She and her
lovesick'Tityras awakened no image whatever

‘my mind.

Dut a miracle had been revesled to me,
the inealeulable, the amazing beauty which
‘ould exist in the sound of verves. My prosodical instinct was awakened, quite suddenly
that dim evening, as my Father and T sat
lone in the breakfast-room after tea, serenely
accepting the hour, for once, with no idea of
fexhortation or profit. Verse "a breeze mid
blossoms playing” as Coleridge says, descended
from the roses asa moth might have done,
and the magic oft took hold of my heart for
ever. T persuaded my Father, who was &
Uitle astonished at: my insistence, to repeat
the lines over and over again. At last my
brain aught thera, and as Twalked in Benny's
garden, of as T hung over the tidal pools at
the edge ofthe sa, all my inner being used to
ing out with the sound of

Farman ere ote Acari a

 
CHAPTER VIL

Ix the previous chapter T bave dwelt on some
of the lighter eonditions of our life at this
time; I must now tun to itin a less fivolous
aspect. As my tenth year advanced, the
development of my character gave my Father,
Twill not say, anxiety, but matter for serious
reflection, My intelligence vas now peresived
to be taking a sudden tart; visitors drew my
Father's attention to the fact that 1 was
“ ‘ut s0 much.” T grew rapidly in
stature, having been a litle shrimp of « thing
‘up to that time, and 1 no longer appeared
‘much youngerthan my years. Looking buck,
T'do fot think that there was any sudden
‘mental development, but that the change was
tainly a social one. 1 had boon reserved,
timid and tacitorn ; T had disliked the company of strangers. But with my tenth year,
[certainly unfolded, so far as to become
sociable and talkative, and perhaps I struck

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘those around me as grown “clever,” beemise
Ts the things whieh Thad previously only
thought. ‘There was » change, no doubt, yet
believe that it was mainly physical, rather
than mental My excessive frigility—or ap
rent fragility, for T must have been always
‘wity—decreased ; Islet better, and therefore
grew less nervous: I ate better, and therefore
put on flesh IP T preserved @ delicate lok

people still used to say in my presence,
That dear child is not long for this world!"
—it was in consequence ofa sort of habit into
which my body tnd grown si was a trans
preney which did not speak of what was in
Store for me, but of what I had already passed
through.

‘The increased activity of my intellectual
system now showed itself in what I believe to
‘ben very healthy form, direct imitation, ‘The
rage for what is alle "originality" is pushed
to such a length in these days that even
children ste not considered promising, unless
they attempt things preposterous and une
praleled. From bis eadliest hour, the
fmbitious person is told that to make a road
‘where none has walked before, to do exily
‘what i is impossible for others to do a all, to
create new forms of thought and expresion,

190

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
are the only reipes for genius: and in trying
to-exenpe om all sides from every resemblance
to his predecessors, he adopts at once an air of
‘eccentricity and pretentiousness.. This eoninues to he the accepted view of originality
but, inspite of this conventional opinion, T
Told that the healthy sign of an activity of
mind in early youth isnot to be striving after
unheard-of mietles, but to imitate elosely and
cneefully what is being said and done in the

cnity. ‘The child of @ great seulptor wil
thang about the studio, and will ty to hammer
‘head out of a waste piece of marble with a
‘ail; it does not follow that he too will be @
seulptor. The child of « politician will sit in
committee with a row of empty chairs, and
vill harengue an imaginary sete from behind
the eurtins. 1, the son af
through a miroscope and
sw there, would fain observe Tor mysel, and
Paint my observations. It did not fellow,
Alas! that Twas built to be 2 miniature:
Pinter or a savant, but the activity of «
‘hildish intelligence was shown by my desire
to copy the results of such energy as I saw
nearest at hand.

Inthe secular direction, this now took the
form a my pearing ile monograph ee

    

 

 

        

 

 
 

FATHER AND SON
side crostures, which were aranged, tabulated
snd divided as exactly as posible ou the pate
‘composing for
Tote these
‘out upon sheets of paper of the same size as
is printed page, and 1 adored them with
watercolour plates, meant. to emulate his

 

 

 

postiches are still prernd in glancing st them now T wonder,
not at'any skill that they possess but at the
perseverance and the pitiene, the evidence of
close and persistent labour. I was not set to
these tasks by my Father, who, in fet, did
not much approve of them. He was touched,
‘a0, with the originality "heresy, and exhorted
ime not to copy him, but to go out into the
frarden or the shore and describe. something
neve, inanew way. That was quite imposible;
1 possesed no initiative. But I ean now well
‘understand why my Father, very indulgently

nd good-temperedly, deprecated these exerses of mine. They took up, and, as he might
trell think, wasted, an enormous quantity of
‘ime; and they were, moreover, parodies, rather
than imitations, of his witings, for 1 invented
now species, with sapphire spots andl erimson
tentacles and amber bands, which were close

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘enough to his veal species to he disconcerting
He came from conscientiously. shepherding
the locks of ocean, and I do not wonder thit
my singystraked, speckled snd spotted varieties
put him out of countenance. If 1 had not
been so innocent and solemn, be might have
fancied Twas mocking him

"These extrordinary excursions into science,
falsely socalled, oceupied a large past of my
time, There was a little spare room at the
bck of our hous, dedicated to lumber and to
‘empty portmanteau. ‘There was «table in it
already, and T added a stool; this. cheeless
partment now bectme my stad. I spent so
‘many hours here, in solitude and without
‘making 4 sound, Ustt my Father's curiosity, if
not his suspicion, was oceasionally roused, and
Fhe would make a sudden raid on me. was
always discovered, doubled up over the table,
‘with my pen and ink, or else my box of colours
‘and tumbler of turbid water by my hand,
‘working away like a Chinese stdent shut up
in his matrieulating box

Te might have been done for a wager,
anything so sinful had ever been dreamed
fof in our pious household, ‘The apparatus
twas slow and laboured, In order to. keep
‘my uncouth handwriting in bounds, 1 was

198 .

 

 

 
PATHER AND SON
obliged to rule not lines only, bt borders to
my pages, ‘The subject did not lend itselt
to any flow of language, and T was obliged
incessantly to borrow sentences, word for word,
from my Fathers published books. Diss
couraged by every one around me, daunted by
‘the Iaborious eflart needful to carey out the
scheme, it seems edd to me now dikt 1 persisted in so strange and wearisome an employ
nt but i became a absorbing passion, and
‘was indalyed in to the negleet of other lessons
and other pleasures.

‘My Father, asthe spring advanced, used to
come up to the Box-room, as my retreat was
called, and hunt me out into the sunshine.
But Tsoon erept buck to my mania. Tt gave
him much trouble, and Miss Marks, who
thought it sheer idleness, was vociferous in
objection. She would gladly have tom up all
‘my writings and paintings, and have set mie to
‘2 useful task. My Father, with his strong
hatural individualism, could not take this
view. He yas intersted in this strange
treuk of mine, and he could not wholly
condemn it, But he must have thought it «
little eraay, andi is evident to me now that

Tod wo the revolution in domestic polity by
‘which he began to encourage my acqtintance

  

 
FATHER AND SON
with other young people as much as he had
previously discouraged it. He saw that I eould
hot be allowed to spend my whole time in
Title stuf'y room making solemn and viicu
lows imitations of Papers read before the Lin
‘naan Society. He was grieved, moreover, at
the bodness of my pictures, for T had ‘no
native skill; and he teed to teach me his own.
system of miniature-painting as applied to
natural history. I was foreed, in deep depression of spirits, totum from my grotesque
‘monographs, and paint under my Father's eye,
and from a finished drawing of his,» gorgeous
tropic bird in fight. Aided by my habit of
imitation, 1 did at length prodace something
‘whieh might have shown ‘promise, if it had
rot been wrung, from me, touch by touch,
pigment by pigment, under the orders of
tsk-master,
“All this had its abwurd side, but I seem to
perceive that it had also its value. It is,
(4 mistake to look too near at hand for
the benefits of education. What is actually
taught in early childhood is often that pact of
taining which makes leat impression on the
character, and is of the least permanent
importance. My labours failed to make me &
zoologist, and the multitude of my designs
10s

  

 

 
FATHER AND SON
and my descriptions have left me helplesly
jgnorant of the anatomy of a ser-anemone
Yet T cannot look pon the mental discipline
5 useless. It taught me to concentrate my
fttention, to define the mature of distinctions,
to see accurataly, and to name what 1 sav.
Moreover, it gave me the habit of going on
with any’ plese of work I had in and, not
flagging heenuse th interest or picturesqueness
fof the theme had declined, but pushing forth
towards « definite goal, well-foresen and
limited beforehand, “For almost any. intel
Ieetual employment in Inter life, it seems to
me that this discipline was valuable. Fam,
however, not the les conscious how ludicrous
was the mode in whieh, in my tenth year, 1
‘obtained it

‘My spititual condition occupied my Father's
‘thoughts very insistently atthistime. Closing,
1s he did, most ofthe doors of worldly pleasure
fand energy upon his conscience, he had eon
tinued to purse his scientific investigations
‘without any sense of sin. Most fortunate it
‘was, thatthe collecting of marine animals in
the tidal pools, and the desription of them
in pages which were addrested to the wide
Scientfle publi, at no time occured to ima as
in any way inconsistent with his holy calling,

  

 
FATHER AND SON
His conscience was so delicate, and often 30
‘morbid in itsdeliscy, that if that had oooursed
to him, he would certainly have abandoned
his investigations, and have been left without,
fan employment. Hut happily he justified his
investigation by regneding it ws a gloriention
of God's rested works. In the introduction
to his “Actinologia Britannic,” written at the
time which [have now reached in this nar
tive, he sent forth his labours with a phrase
‘hich T should think unparalleled in connec
tion with a letened and technica biologieal
treatise. He stated concerning that book,
thatche published it “as one more tebute
humbly offered tothe glory ofthe Triune God,
‘who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in
working.” Scientife investigation sincerely
carried out in that spirit became a kind of
‘weekday interpretation of the current creed
of Sundays.

‘The development of my faculties, of which
I have spoken, extended to the religious
sphere no les than to the secular. Here also,
A T look back, I see that 1 was extremely
fmitative. expanded in the warmth of my
Father's fervour, and, on the whole, in a
‘manner that was satisfactory to him. He observed the richer hold that I was now taking

0

 

 

   
FATHER AND SON
on life; he saw my faculties branching in many
directions, and he became very anxious to
secure my maintenance in grace. Tn earlier
{ears certain sides of my character had offered
‘sort of passive resistance to his ideas, Thad
let what I did not care to weleome pass over
‘my mind in the curious density that children

 

 

 

suloptin order to avoid veeiving impressions —
blankly, dambly, achieving by stupidity, what
they cannot achieve by argument. 1 thin

    

that Chad frequently done thie; thet he had
‘been brought up against « dead wal: although
fon other sides of my nature T had been
responsive and docile. But now, in my tenth
Yeu, the imitative faculty got the upperhand,
‘nd nothing seemed sostractiveas to he what
Twas expected to be, If there was a doubt
now, it lay in the other direction; it seemed
hardly normal that so young «child should
appear so receptive and 0 9

‘My Father belived himself justified, at this
juncture in making a tremendous efor He
“wished to secure. me finally, exhaustively,
before the age of puberty could daven, before
my soul was fettered. with the love of esenal
‘things. He thought that if 1 could now be
identified with the saints” and. ould stand
‘on exactly ther footing, « habit of conformity

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘would be secured, T should meet the pagenfking tendencies ‘of advancing years with
security if could be forearmed with all the
‘weapons of a sanctified life. He wished me,
in short, to be received into the community of
the Brethren on the terms of an adult. ‘There
‘were dificulties in the way of earying out
this scheme, and they. were urged upon him,
‘mare or less courageously, by the elders of the
hhoreh, “But he overbore them. Whit the
‘ficulties were, and what were the arguments
hich he used to sweep those dificlties away,
Tost now explin, for i this Iny the centre
‘of our future relations as father and son
In dealing with the peasants around hin

among whom he was engaged in an active
propaganda, my Father always insisted on the
hecesity of conversion. ‘There must be a
new birth and being, « fesh eration in God.
‘This exsis he was accustomed to regard as
Imunifesting itself in a sudden and definite
luphearal. There might have been prolonged
puctcal piety, deep and true contrition for
sin, but these, although the natural and
‘table prologue to conversion, were not
‘conversion ise People hung’ on at the
‘confines of regeneration, often for avery long
‘ime; my Father dealt earnestly with them,

 

  
FATHER AND SON
‘the elders ministered to them, with explant
ton, exhortation and prayer. Such penons
‘were in a gracious state, but they were not in
state of grace. If they should suddenly die,
they would pase away ian tnconverted condition, and all that could be sid in their favour
‘wasa vague expression of hope that they would
bene from Gods uncovenanted meres
‘But on some day, at some hour and minute,
if life was spared to them, the way of salvation
‘would be revealed to these parsons in such an
aspect that they would be ensbled instantaneously to accept it ‘They would take
it conselously, as one takes a gift from the
hand thet offers it, This act of taking was
the process of conversion, and the person who
so. accepted was a child of God) now,
skthough a single minute ago he had been
‘child of wrath. ‘The very root of ‘human
nature had tobe changed, and, inthe
majority of cases, this change was sudden,
patent, palpable
T have just said, “in the majrity of eases.”
because my Father admitted the possibility of
exceptions. The formula was, If any man,
hath not the Spisit of Christ, he is none of
his” “As a rule, no one could possese the
‘Spirit of Christ, without » conseious and full
FATHER AND SON
sbandonment of the soul, and this, however
carefully led up to, and prepared for with tears
‘and renonciations, was not, eould not, be made,
except at a set moment of time. Faith, in
an coterie and almost symbolic sense, was
Necessary, and could not be a result of
argument, but was » state of heart. In these
opinions my Father departed no wise fom
the strict evangelical doctrine of the Protestant
churches, but he held it in 4 mode and with a
severity peculiar to himself. Now, itis plain
that this stat of heart, this voluntary deed of
acceptance, presupposed fall and rational
eonseiousness of the relations of things. It
might be clearly achieved by a penon of
humble cultivation, but only by one who was
fully capable of independent thought, in other
‘words by « more of less adult person. The
man of woman claiming the privileges of
conversion must be able t understand and to
‘grasp what his eligious education was siming
ES

It is extraordinary what trouble it often
gave my Father to know whether be was
usted in admitting to the communion
‘people of very limited powers of expresion.
A hsemless, bumble labouring man would
‘come with a request to be allowed to © break

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Dread.” Tt was only by the use of strong
leading questions that he could be induced to
mention Christ as the ground of his trust at
All, Trecolletan elderly agricultural labourer
boeing closeted for a long time with my
‘Father, who enme out at est ina sort of dazed
condition, and replied to our inquiris,—with
‘shrug of his shoulders ashe ssid it" 1 was
obliged to put the Name snd Blood and
Work of Jesus into his very mouth. Tt is
true that he assented eondially at last but 1
confess I was grievously daunted by the poor
inteltigence!”

But there was, or there might be, another
class of persons, whom ently training, separation
from the world, nd the care of godly parents
had s0 ently firilarised with the acceptable
calling of Christ thet their conversion had
fcenred, unperceived and. therefore -unrecorded, at an extraordinarily exly age. It
‘would be in vsin to look for a repetition of
the phenomenon in those cases. The heavenly
fire must not he expected to descend n second
time; the lips are touched withthe burning coal
fonce, and once only. If, accordingly, these
precociously selected spirits are to be excluded.
Theeause-no new birth is observed in them at
1 mature age, Uhey must continue outside in

 
FATHER AND SON
the cold, since the phenomenon cannot be
repeated. When, therefore, there isnot
possible any further doubt of their being in
possession af salvation, longer delay is useles,
nd worse than uselss.' The fact of conversion,
though not recorded nor even recollected,
must be aepted on the evidenee of confession
of faith, and as soon as the intelligence
evidently developed, the person not merely
‘may, but should be accepted into communion,
although stil immature in body, although in
years till even child. This. my Father
Delieved to be my ease, and in this rare class
di he fondly persuade himself to station me.
‘As I have sid, the congregation, —although
docile and tin, and litle wble as units, to
hold thei own against their minister behind
Tis back were fsintly hostile to this plan
None oftheir own children had ever been s0
‘much as suggested for membership, and each of
themselves, it ripe years, had been subjected
to severe cross-examination. 1 think i was
rather bitter pill for some of them to swallow
‘hat a pet litle boy often should be admitted,
ana grown-up person, tall the hard-won piv
leges of their onder. Mary Grace Bur
‘ame back from her visits to the cottagers,
Aisffetion here and there, gram

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
PATHER AND SON
lings in the rank and file, But quite asmany,
expecally of the women, enthusiastically supported my Fathers wish, gloried sloud in the
‘manifestations of my ealy piety, snd professed
to see in it something of mirseulous promise
"The expresion “ another Infant Samtel "was
widely used. T Decame quite a subject of
contention. A war ofthe sexes threatened to
break out overme; Iwas a disturbing element
at cottage breakfasts. Twas mentioned at
Public prayer-meetings, not indeed by mame,
but, in the extraordinary ilusive way custom.
ary in our devotions, “one amongst us of
tender years” or as“ sapling in the Lord's
vineyard.”

"To ll this my Father put» stop in his own
high:handed fishion. After the mom
meeting, one Sunday in the autumn of 1859,
he desired the attention of the saints to a
personal matter which was, pechaps, not
‘unfumiliar to them by rumour. That was, he
cexpluned, the question of the admission of his
beloved litle son to the communion of saints
in the breaking of bread. He allowed—
tnd Tt there in evidence, paely smiling at
the audience, my feet scarcely touching the
ground—that I was not what is styled adult;
Tas not, he frankly admitted, « grownup

 

   

 

 
FATHER AND SON
person, But I was adult in a knowledge of
‘he Lord ; Tposvessed an insight into the plan
fofsalvation which many a hoary head might
‘envy forts falnes, its elearness, its conformity
with Seripture doctrine. his was « palpable
hit at more than one stombler and fumbler
After the truth, and several hoery heads were
bowed.

My Father then went on to explain very
fully. the postion which 1 have already
attempted todefine. Headmitted theabsence
in my ease of sudden, apparent act of con
version resulting upon convition of sin. But
hh stated the grounds of his belief that | had,
in stil easier infaney, been converted, and
the declared that if so, I ought no longer to be
‘excluded from the privileges of communion.
‘He ssid, moreover, that he was willing on this
‘ovemion to waive his own privilege as a
Iminister, and that he would rather call on
Drother Fawkes and Brother Bere, the leading
‘elders, to examine the candidate in his stead.
‘Thin was ammaster-stroke, for Brothers Fawkes
‘and Bere had been suspected of leading the
disaffection, and this threw all the busden of
esponsibility on them. The mecting broke
nupin great aminbility, and my Father and 1
went home together in the very highest of

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
spirits. 1, indeed, in my pride, touched the
vege of indiscretion by saying: " When I have
‘been admitted to fellowship, Papa, shall 1 be
allowed to call you ‘beloved Brother't” My
Father was too well pleased with the morning's
‘work tobe ertial. He laughed and answered:
“That, my Love, though steetly correct,
would hardly, 1 fer, be thought judicious !"

Tt was suggested that my tenth birthday,
‘whieh followed this public announcement by
4 few days, would be a capital occasion for me
‘to go through the ordeal. Accordingly, after
ark (for our new lamp was lighted for the
first time in honour of the event) I withdrew
lane into our drawing-room, which had just,
at length, been furnished, and whieh looked, 1
thought, very smart, Hither eame to me, first
Brother Fawkes, by himself; then Brother
‘Bere, by himself; and then both together, so
that you may say, if you are pedantially
inlined, that I underwent three siceesive
interviews. -My Father, out of sight some‘where, was, of course, playing th part ofstage
manager

T felt not atall shy, but so highly strung:
‘hat my whole mature seemed to throb with
‘excitement. My frst examiner, on the other
hhand, was extremely confused. Fawkes,

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘who was a builder in a small busines of his
‘own, was short and fat: his complexion, which
wore a deeper and more uniform rose-colour
‘than sl, T observed to be stared with dew‘drops of nervous emotion, which he wiped
fway at intervals with a large bandana had
Keerchiet. He was so long in coming to the
point, that T was obliged to lead bim to it
‘myself, and Isat up on the sofa in the full
lamplight, and tested my faith in the atone‘ment with a fluency that surprised myself,
Tefore Thad done, Fawkes, middle-aged man
with the reputation of being a very. sti
employer of labour, was weeping like child.
Tere, the carpenter, a long, thin and dry
‘man, with a curiously immobile eye, did not
fall 9 easly a prey to my fascinations. He
pat me through my paces very sharply, for he
hud something of the temper of an attomey
mingled with his religiousness. However, 1
‘was equal to him, and he, too, though he held
his own ead higher, was not les impressed
than Frotkes had been, bythe surroundings of
theoceasion. Nether of them had ever been in
‘our drawing-room since it was furnished, and T
thought that each of them noticed how smart
the wall-paper was. Indeed, I believe I drew
their attention to it. After the two solitary

 
FATHER AND SON
examinations were over, the elders eame in
gain, as T have said, and they peayed for a
Tong time. We all thee knelt at the sof, 1
hetween them. ut by this time, to. my:
‘great exaltation of spirits there had sueceoded
fan equally dismal depresion, It was my
‘tum now to weep, and I dimly remember my
Father coming into the room, and my being
curried up to bed, in a state of collapse and
fatigue, by the silent and kindly Miss Masks.

On the following Sunday morning, Twas
the principal subject which occupied an
tanustlly crowed meeting. My Father,
looking whiter and yet darker than usual, called
‘upon Brother Fawkes and Brother Bere to
state to the assembled saints what tir ex:
peviences had been in connection with their
sits to" one who desired to be admitted to
the breaking of bread. Tt was tremendously
exciting to me to hear myself spoken of with
this impersonal publisity, and 1 had no fear
of the result.

“Events showed that T had no need of fer
Fawkes and Bere were sometimes accused
‘of rivalry, which indeed broke out a few
years later, and gave my Fether much
‘anxiety and pain. But on this occasion their
‘unanimity. was wonderful. Each strove to

 

 

 

 
PATHER AND SON
‘exceed the other in the tributes which they
pid to my piety. My answers nd been 50
full and cles, my humility save the mark!)
Ind been so sweet, my acquaintance with
Seripture so amazing, my testimony to all the
leading principles of salvation so distinct and
celiustiv, that they could enly say thet they
had felt confounded, and yet deeply cheered
‘and Te far along their owt heavenly path, by
heating such accents fall from the ips of a
babe anda suckling. I id not like being
desorbed as a suekling, but every lot has its
crumpled rose-leaf, and in all other respects
the report of the elders was a triumph. My
thet then clenched the whole matter by
ising and snnouneing that T had exprosed an
independent desire to eonfess the Lord by the
tot f public baptism, immediately efter which
T should be admitted to communion “as an
adult” Emotion ran so high at this, that «
large portion of the congregation insisted on
walking with us buck to our garden-gate, to
the stapefuction of the est of the villagers,
My public baptism was the central event of,
ty whole shildhood, Everything, since the
‘eatliet dawn of consciousness, semmed to have
Deen leading uptoit. Everything, aterwards,
Seemed to be leading down and away from it

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘The practice of immersing communicants on
the sea-bech at Oddicombe had now been
completely abandoned, but we possessed ns
{et no tank for abaptismal purpose in ou ow,
Room. ‘The Room in the adjoining town,
however, was realy quite a large chapel, and
it was amply provided with the needful conveniences. Tt was our practice, therefore, at
this time, to claim the hospitality of our
neighbours Baptisms were made an occasion
for friendly relations between the two congregations, and led to pleasant socal intereourse.
Telieve that the ministers and elders of the
two meetings arranged to combine their frees
at thee times, and to baptize communicants
‘rom both congregations
“The minister of the town meeting was MES,
a very handsome old gentleman, of venerable
find powerful appearance. He hed snowy hair
tnd along white beard, but from onder shagay
fyebrows there blazed out great black eyes
‘which warned the beholder that the snow was
fan omament and not a sigh of deereptide,
‘eve of my baptism at length drew near;
‘was fixed for October 12, almost exactly
three weeks after my tenth birthday. 1 was
dressed in old clothes, and a suit of smarter
things was packed up in a carpet-bag. After

 

 

 

  
PATHER AND SON
nightfall, this earpet-bag, accompanied by
my Father, myself, Miss Marks and Mary
Grace, was put in a four-whecled cab,
and driven, « long way in the dark, to the
chapel of our fiends. ‘There we were received,
ina Blaze of lights, with a pressure of hands,
‘with « murmur of voices, with ejaculations
and even with tears, and were conducted,
mid unspeakable emotion, to places of honour
in the front row ofthe congregation.

‘The scene was one which would have been
limpresive, not merely to such hermits as we
‘were, but even to worldly persons accustomed
to life and to its curious and. variegated
experiences. ‘To. me it was dasaling beyond
‘words, inexpresibly exciting, an initistion to
‘every kind of publicity and glory. There
were thany candidates, but the rest of them, —
‘mere grown-upmen and women,—gave thanks
loud that it was their privilege to follow
‘where Ile, Twas the acknowledged hero of
the hour, ‘Those were days when newspaper
enterprise was scarely in its infaney, and the
event owed nothing to journalistic effort. In
spite of that, the news of this remarkable
‘ceremony, the immersion of «litle boy of ten
years old “as an adult,” had spread far and
Wide theough the county in the course of

 

 

  
FATHER AND SON
three weeks. ‘The chapel of our hosts was, as
have said, very large i was commonly too
large for their needs, but on this might it was
crowed to the etlling, and the erowd had
come~as every soft murmurer assured me—
to see me.

"There were people there who had travelled
from Exeter, from Dartmouth, from ‘Totnes,
to witness 80 extriordinary a ceremony,
‘There was one old woman of eighty-five
‘who had come, my neighbours whispered to
‘me, all the way from Moreton-Hlampstend, 0
purpose to see me baptized. [looked at her
crumpled countenance with amazement, for
‘Here was no curiosity, no interest visible in it.
She sit there perfectly listless, looking at
nothing, but chewing between her toothless
{gums what appeared to he a jujube

In the centre of the chapel-loor « number
of planks had been taken up, and revealed «
ool which might have been supposed #8/be &
fall swimming-bath. We gazed dawn into
this dark square of mysterious seaters, fom
the tepid surface of which fuint swiels of
vapour rose. ‘The whole congregation wat
amanged, tier above tier, about the four
stonight sides of this pool

 
 
FATHER AND SON
‘unseemly struggling oF stan
Mr. S. now rose, an impressive hieraic figure,
commanding attention and imploring perfect
silence. He held a small book in bis hand,
and he was preparing to give out the number
ff hyn, when an astounding incident took
place,

There was a great splash, and « tall young
woman was peroeived to be in the baptismal
pool, her arms waving shove her head, and
her figure held upright in the water by the
inflation of the ale underneath her erinoline,
Which veas blown out like bladder, as in
someestravagant old fishion-plate, Whether
bet feet touehed the bottom of the font 1
cannot say, but suppose they did so. An
Indescribable turmeil of shieks sind cries followed on this extmordinary apparition. A
‘great many people excitedly’ called upon other
‘people to be calm, and an instance wes given
‘of the remark of Jones Smith that

eosin questo quit, Sencha
Tap tte the bab he pts

  

 

 

 

‘The young woman, ia more or les fainting
‘condition, was presently removed from the
‘water, and taken into the sort of tent which
‘was prepared for candidates. Tt was found
FATHER AND SON
that she herself had wished to be a candidate
and Td earnestly desired to be baptized, but
Hat this had been forbidden by her parents,
‘On the supposition that she fell in by accident,
pious coincidence was detectad in this allie
‘the Lord had pre-ordaned that she should be
hptized in spite of all opposition. ‘But my
Father, in his shrewd way, doubted. He
pointed out to us, next morning, that, in the
first place, she had not, in any sense, heen
Deptized, as her head had not been immersed ;
and that, n the second place, she must have
elibrataly jumped i, sine, had she stumbled
land fallen forward, her hands and face would
Ihave struck the water, wheress they remsined
quite dry, She belonged, however, to. the
‘neighbour congregation, and we had no respon
sibility to pursue the inquiry any further.
‘Decorum being again secured, Mr. S., with
‘unimpaired digoity, proposed to the eongregation a hymn, which was long enough to
‘ceupy them during the preperations for the
sctual baptism. He then “retired to. the
vestry, and I (for I was to be the first to
testi) was led by Miss Marks and. Mary
Grace into the species of tent of which I have
just epoken, ts pale sides seemed to shake
with the jubilant singing of the saints outside,

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
“while pat of my clothing was zemoved and I
‘was prepared forimmerson. A sudden cessation of the hyinn wamed us that the Minister
‘was now ready, and we emerged into the
_lare of lights snd faces to find M.S. aleeady
Standing in the water up to his knees. | Feel
jing ss small as one of our microscopical
specimens, almost. infinitesimally tiny as 1
descended into his'itanio rms, Iwas handed
down the steps to him. He was dressed in a
kkind of long surplice, underneath which—a5
T could not, even in that moment, help
cobserving—the air gathered in long bubbles
‘which he strove to flatten out. ‘The end of
Ins noble beard he had tucked aways is shit
sleeves were tured up nt the wrist,

“The entire congregation was now silent, 90
silent that the uncertain splashing of my feet
as I descended seemed to deafen me. Mr. S.
alittle embarrassed by my short stature, sue‘eoded at length in securing me with one
pal on my chest and the other between my
Shoulders. Heid, slowly, in «loud, sonorows
voice that seemed to enter my brain and
‘empty iT baptize thee, my Brother, in the
name of the Father and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost!" Having intoned this formula,
the then gently ung me backwards until 1

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘was wholly under the water, and then—as he
Trought me up again, and tenderly steadied
‘my fest on the steps ofthe font, and delivered
ime, dripping and spluttering, into the anxious
hands of the women, who hurried me to the
tent—the whole assembly broke forth i a
thunder of song, « pean of praise to God for
this manifestation of his marvellous goodness
and merey. So great was the enthusiasm,
that it could haedly be restrained 50 1s to
allow the other candidates, the humdrum
adults who followed in my wet and glorious
footsteps, to undergo a ritual about which,
jn their emse, no one in the congregation
pretended to be able to take even the most
Tang interest

My Father's happiness during the next few
weeks it is now pathetie to. me to look back
‘upon. His stemness melted into a universal
compliance He laughed and smiled, he
pid to my opinions the tribute of the gravest
fonsidertion, he indulged—utterly unlike
wont,—in shy and furtive careses. I could
fexpress no wish that he did not attempt to
fulfil, and the only warning whieh he eared
to give me was one, very gently expressed,
‘gains sprit) pride.

"This was certainly required for Twas ped

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘out with a sense of my own holiness. 1 was
religiously confidential with my Father, com
descending with Miss Marks (who T think
had given up trying to make tal out), haughty
with the servants, and invulferably patronising
with those young companions of my own age
wvith whom T was nov beginning to asocnte

would fain close this remarkable episode
on a key of solemnity, but alas! if T am to be
loyal tothe trth, 1 mast record that some of
the other litte boys presently complained to
Mary Grace that I put out my tongue at them
sn mockery, during the servie in the Room, t0
remind them that I now broke bread as one of
the Saints and that they didnot.

 

 
CHAPTER 1X

"The result of my being admitted into the
‘eommnion of the Saints” ws that, as soon
‘as the nine days! wonder of the thing passed
by, my position beeame, if anything, more
Inarssing’ and pressed then ever. Tt is trie
‘tut freedom was permitted to me in certain
direttions; Twas allowed to acta little more
‘on my own responsibility, and was not so
Incessantly informed what * the Lords will”
might be in this matter and in that, becuse
it was now conceived thet, in sueh dilemmas,
Teould command private intelligence of my
‘own. But there wis no relaxation of our
rigid manner of life, and 1 think I now began,
by comparing it with the habits of others, to
perceive how very strict it was.

"The main difference in ny lot as « communicant from that of a mere dweller in the tents
‘of righteousness was that Twas expected to

respond with instant fervour to every appeal

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
of conscience. When I did not do this, my
position was almost worse than it had been
before, beeause of the livelier nature of the
responsibilty which weighed upon me. My
Title faults of conduct, too, assumed shnpes of
‘erible importance, since they proceeded fom
fone So signally enlightened. My Father was
never tired of reminding me tht, now that T
‘yas a profesing Christian, I mast remember,
in everything Tad, that Twas an example to
others. Hl used to draw dreadful pictures of
suppostitions litle boys who were secretly
watching me from alar, and whose whole
‘roer, in time and in eternity, might be
disastously affected if I did not keep my
lamp burning.

"The year which followed upon my baptism
id not open very happily at the Room.
‘Coniderable changes hat now taken place in
the community. My. Futher'’s impressive
services, « ertain prestige in his preach
the mere fut that so vigorous person was at
the head of affirs, had induced a large
increase in the attendance. By this time, if
‘my memory does not fall me as to dates, we
Tnnd left the dismal loft over the stables, and
Ind built ourselves «perfectly. plain, but
commodious and vellneranged chapel in the

20)

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
centre of the village. This greatly added to
the prosperity of the meeting, Everything
hhad combined to make our services popular,
and ad attmcted to sus a new element of
‘younger people. Numbers of youthful masons
and carpenters, shopygirls and domestic
servants, found the Room « pleasant trysting‘lace, and) were more or lest superficially
Induced to accept salvation as it was offered
to them in my Father's searching addreses
My Father was very shrewd in dealing with
rere curiosity or idle motive, and sharply
picked off any youths who simply eame’ to
rake eyes atthe girls, or any “maids” whose
only object was to display their new bonnetrings. But he was powerles against a
temporary sincerity, th simuluerum of a true
change of heart, I have often heard him
say,—of some young fellow who had attended
‘our services with fervour for little while, nd
then had timed cold and left us —Mand 1
thought that the Holy Ghost hed wrought
in him!" Such disappointments. grievously
depress an evangelist

‘Religious bodies are lsble to strange snd
‘unaccountable uctuations. At the beginning
‘of the third year since our arrival, the congre‘gation seemed to bein a very prosperous state,

 

 

 
PATHER AND SON
a regards attendance, conversions and other
‘outward signs of activity. Yet it was qui
soon after this that my” Futher began to be
Tmarased by all sorts of troubles, and the
‘pring of 1860 was a crtiel moment in the
History ofthe community. Although beloved
tw take very high tone about the Saints, and
involved them sometimes in cloud of laude
tory metaphyses, the truth was that they were
edge Ga
tive types not well instructed inthe rules
SF condact ead Iisle to exactly the sume
‘weaknesses ns invade the rural character in
every country and latitude. That they were
exhorted to behave as“ children of ight,” and
‘ht the majority of them sincerely desired to
do credit to their high ealling, could not pre
vent their being beset by the sins which had
fected their forebears for generations past.
‘The addition of so many young. persons of
each sex to the communion led to an entitely
new class of embarrassment. Now there arose
endless dificulties about “engagements,”
fabout youthful brethren who "vent out
walking” with even more youthful sisters.
Glaneing over my Father's notes, 1 observe
the ceaseless repetition of cases in which Sosnd-$0 courting" Such-an-one, followed by

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
the melancholy record that he has * deserted
her. In my Fathers stern language, “desertion" would very often mean no more than
‘hat the amatory pai had blamelesly changed
their minds ; but in some cues it meant mare
and worse than this, Tt was a very. great
distress to him that sometimes the young men
‘and women who showed the most lively interest
in Scripture, and who had apparently accepted
‘heway of salvation withthe fullest intelligence,
were precisely thole who seemed to struggle
with leat success against temptation to unchastity. “He put this down to the eoncentrated malignityof Sstan who directed his most
poisoned darts aguinst the fairest of the flock.
‘In addition to these troubles, there exe
reerimination, mutual charges of drunkenness
in private, all sorts of petty jealousy and
scandal, ‘There were frequent definite acts of
““backsliding on the part of members, who
‘nd in consequence to be put away.” Noone
of these cases might be in itself extremely
serious, bt when many of them came together
‘they seemed to indicate thatthe church wasin
san unbealthy condition. ‘The particulars of
‘many of these scandals were concealed from
‘me, but Iwas an adroit litle pitcher, and had
cultivated theart ofseeming to beinterested in

 

 

 

 
PATHER AND SON
something else, © book or a flower, while my
elders were talking confidentially. As x rule,
‘while I would fin have acquired more details,
1 vas finly welkinformed about the errors of
the Saints although Tas often quaintlyigno‘ant ofthe real nature of those errors.

‘Not nfrequently, persons who had fallen nto
sin repented of it under my Father's penetraSingminisratons, hey were inthe pen
tence to use strange symbolic expression
esl oasis
‘who tnd been accused of intemperance and
Jud) been suspended from communion, repearing with face that shone with soup and
setifcation, and saying tome, “ Oh! blesed
Child, you're wonderin’ to zee old Pewings
here again, but He have rolled away my
‘mountain! For once, I was absolutly at a
Toss, but she meant that the Lord had removed
the Tond of her sins, and restored her toa state
of grace.

Te was in consequence of these backslidings,
which had become alarmingly frequent, that
‘arly in 1860 my Father determined on proClaiming a solemn fast. He delivered one
Sunday wiht seemed to
‘address, calling upon us all closely to examine
‘ur consciences, and reminding us of the appal
 

 

 

  

 

 
FATHER AND SON
ling fit ofthe church of Laodicea. “He said
‘that it was not enough to have made a satisfactory confession of faith, nor even to have
sealed at confession in baptism, if we did not
liveup to our protestations, Salvation, he told
usm indeed precede holiness of life yet both
are essential. Tt was a dark and rainy winter
‘morning when he made thie tesible address,
which fightenes he congregation extremely
When the marrow was congealed within ou
‘hones, and when the bowed heads before him,
nd the faintly audible sobs of the wornen ia

 

the background, told him eat his lesson, had
one home, he pronounced the keeping of a
‘ay in the following week wea fast of contstion,
‘Those of you who have to pursue your daily
‘eeupations will pursue them, but sustained

 

His influence over these gentle peasant
people was certainly remarkable, for no effort
twas made to resist his exhortation. Tt was
‘is customary plan to stay a litle while, after
‘the moming meeting was over, and in a very
alfable fashion to shake hands with the saints
‘at on this occasion he staked forth without
word, holding my hand tight until we had
swept out into the street.
FATHER AND SON

How the rst of the congregation kept this
fast T do not know. But it was a dreadful
Alay for us. 1 was awakened in the vitehy
Bight € go off with my Father to the ficom,
where a scanty gathering held a pentential
prayermeeting. We came home, as dawn
‘was breaking, and in process of time sit down
to breakfast, which consisted at thet dismal
hhowe—of slices of dry bread aud a tumbler of
cold water each, During the morning, I was
not allowed to paint, of write, oF withdraw to
amy study in the box-room.” We sty in a
state of depression not to be described, in the
breakfast-z00m, reading books of « devotional
character, with oeeasional wailing of some very
Alolefal hymn. Our midday dinner came st
lasts the meal was strictly confined, as before,
‘to dry slices of the loaf and a tumbler of water.

"The afternoon would have been spent asthe
morning vas, and so my Father spent it
‘But Miss Marks, secing my white checks and
the dark rings round my eyes, besought leave
40 take me out for a walk, This was permitted, with «pledge that T should be given
no species of reeshment. Although I told
‘Miss Marks, in the course of the wall, that 1
was feeling “so leer” (our Devonshire phrase
for bongry), she dared not break her word.

 
FATHER AND SON
‘Our last meal was of the former character, and
the day ended by our trapsing through the
wet to another prayer-mesting, whence 1 retumed in a state bordering on collapse, and
‘was put to bed without further nourishment.
There was no great hardship in all his, 1 dare=
say, but it was certainly rigorous, My Father
‘took pins to see Unt what he had said about
the bread snd water of aflietion was carried
‘out in the bosom of his own family, and by no
fone more untinchingly than by imelE.

My attitude to other people's souls when
1 wis out of my Fathers sight was now a
constant anxiety to me. In our tattling
‘world of small things he hd extrsordinaty
‘opportunities of learning how I behaved when
Twas any from home  T didnot realise tis,
sand I used to think his acquaintance with my
‘deeds and words savoured almost of wizardry.
Hee was accustomed to urge upon’ me the
necesity of “speaking for Jesu in season and
‘out of season," and he so worked upon my
feelings that I would start forth like St.
"Terent, wild for the Moors and martyrdom.
nt any actual impact with persons marvel
lously cooled my ze, and I should hardly ever
have “spoken” st all if it had not been for
that unfortunate phrase “out of season.” Tt

26

 

 
FATHER AND SON
really seemed that one must talk of nothing
se, since fan occasion was notin season it
‘was out of season; there was no alternative,
ro clore time for sous,

‘My Father was very generous. He used to
magnify any little efor that I made, with tam
meting tongue, to sanctify «visit; and people,
now see, were accustomed to give me a
friendly lead inthis direction, so that they might
please him by reporting that 1 had tested "in
the Lords sevice, ‘The whole thing, howeres,
‘was artificial, and was part of my Father's
restles inability to let well alone, It was
not in Teshness or in illnature that he
Worried me so much : on the contrary, it was
all part of his too-nsious love. He was in a
Ihury to see me become a shining light, every
thing that he had himself desired to be, yet
‘with none of his shortcomings.

twas about this time that he burrowed my
‘whole sou! into painful agitation by a phrase
‘that he let fll, without, I believe, attaching
‘any particular importance ta it at the time:
He ‘was occupied, as he 10 often was,
polishing and burnishing my faith, and he was
led to speak of the day when I should ascend
‘the pulpit to preach my first sermon. “Oh!
IMT may be there, out of sight, and hear the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
gospel message proclaimed from your lips,
‘hen Tsall say, ‘My poor work is done, Ol!
‘Lord Jesus, receive may spirit” T canuot
‘express the dismay whieb this aspiration gave
ime, the horror with which T anticipated such
‘mane dinits, Tele ike a smal ad solitary

ied, caught and hung out hopelessly and end
lesly in a grentgitering cage. The clearness
‘of the poronal image affected me as all the
texts and prayers and predictions had filed to
do. T saw myself imprisoned forever in the
religious system which had aight me and
‘would whitl my helpless spisit a in the concentric wheels of my nightly vision. 1 did
not struggle agains it, because T believed
that it was inevitable, and that there was no
other yay of making’ peace with the terible
tnd ever-watehful “God who is a jealous
Goud.” Bat Tooked forward to my fate without seal and without exhilaration, and the fea
of the Lord altogether swallowed up and
‘ancelled any notion of the love of Him.

T should do myself an injustice, however, if
1 deseribed my attitude to faith at this time as
‘wanting’ in candour. I did very eamestly
desire to follow where my Father led That
passion for imitation, which I have already
Aiscused, was strongly developed at this time,

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
andi induced me to repeat the language of
ows Boks in godly ejections which getiy
faifed my grown-up companions and were,
So far as Lean jugs, perfectly sincere
Ahad extremely to be good and holy, and T
thd no doubt in my mind of the abolte n=
{alii of my Fate a8 guide in heavenly
things, Bot Tam perfectly sre that there
ever was a moment in which my hear truly
responded, with native anous, to the words
hich lowed sorely sul a stream of une
ton, from my anointed ip, Tent rel
fnything but an intellect surendr there
‘wes never joy inthe act of resignation, never the
Inte saptire a feling his phantom sl
Hix own threadbare soul sine, tiled
throagh, red agin in glory by a fire which
hems up everything persona std individ
aothin

“Through thick and thin T clang to a hard nut
of individuality, deep down in my eildsh
tature, To the, presre tom witout, T
Fesigoed everything ee, my thought, my
rors, my aitiipations my” assurances, but
there was something wich I never reigned,
ty inate and peratent sll Meck es T
feted, and genly respondent, I wes always
conscious of that innermost qualty which T

~°

 

     
FATHER AND SON
bat ered regen yeti in
Tigo tnt ieee tee
Serco eat oes erin ae
sey

Elsa mete met may dene tl
Oe ey oe ee
muslin eet
Tetue, iat ly to alee Ut Be
ome Ck nal iow Gigs oe ae
poresrot triers teat over hg
eos with our eu anes i
Se pn wort of te Sut of Goa ad
couhiy wring a Tepes ate
Sheet he oa oe
Fymouh toe bet noo of a
fall ch of te Oba in Aree
Lghions = Commentary on tte Fi Hgts
vile” Squish oem helo
easly ta ws ty sm old ope a
Sok etc ott hey ere aad
eco ee oe ae
Sr
perp
Sing Net, wh ol re ete!
Ske ot otras Saleen ea
ioe ae oder
oaths tart gto tal ee
Sie ey

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
the habit of giving what the Archbishop means
by “a kind of natural eredit” to the doctrine
80 persistently impressed upon my conscience
From its very nature this could not but be
‘molten in the dews and exhaled in the sunshine
of life and thought and experience.

My Father, by an indulgent set for the
cxprice of which I eannot. wholly account,
presently let in a flood of imaginative Tight
Which was certainly hostile to my heavenly
calling, My instinctive interest in geography
has already’ been mentioned. This was the
‘one branch of knowledge in. which T needed
no instruction, geographical information seeming to soak into the cells of my brain without
an eff. At tho age of eleven, 1 knew a
fret deal more of maps, and of the mutusl
relation of localities all over the globe, than
ost grown-up people do, It was almost a
‘mechanical aequitement. 1 was now greatly
taken with the geography of the West Indies,
‘of every part of which T had moade MS. maps,
‘There was something poserfully attractive to
tay faney in the great chain of the Antilles,
Tying on the sea ike an open bracelet, with its
‘ig jewels and litle jewels strung on an in
visible thread. liked to shut my eyes and
see it all, in « mental panorama, stretched

 

 
FATHER AND SON
from Cape Sant’ Antonio to the Serpent's
Mouth, Several of these lovely islands, these
‘emeralds and amethysts set on the Caribbean
‘Sea, my Father had known well in his youth,
and. Twas importunate in questioning him
bout them. One day, as I multiplied inquiries.
Ihe rose in his impetuous way, and climbing to
the top af s bookease, brought down a thie
‘volume and presented ittome. “ You'l find all
about the Antilles thre,” he said, and lee me
‘with «Tom Cringle's Log” in my posession.
"The embargo Ind upon every species of
fiction by my Mother's powerful seruple had
never been raised, although she had been dead
four years. As I have said in an earlier
chapter, thie wes & point on which T believe
‘that my Father had never entirely agreed with
her. -He had, however, yielded to her prejuice, and no work of romance, no fittious
story, had ever come in my way. Tt
remarkable that among our books, which
amounted to many hundreds, Thad never discovered & single work of fiction until my
Father himself revealed the existence of
Michael Scott's wild masterpiece. So litle
id T understand what was allowable in the
way of literary invention that 1 began the
story without « doubt tht it was true and 1

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘think it was my Father himself who, in answer
to-an inquiry, explained to me that it was * all
made up.” He advised me to read the descriptions of the seu, and of the mountains of
Suinaiea, and “skip” the pages which gave
imaginary adventures and conversations. But
al not take his counsel; these latter were
the flower of the book to me. I had never
read, never dreamed of anything like them,
find they filed may whole horizon with glory
and with joy.

T suppose that when my Futher was a
younger man, and less pictstic, he bad read
"Tom Cringle's Log” with plensure, beeause
it recalled familiar seenes to him. Much was
explained by the fact that the frontispiece of
this edition was a delieate Tine-engraving of
BBlewfilds, the great lonely house in « garden
‘of Jamaican allspice where for cighteen
‘months he bad worked ss a naturalist. He
‘could not look st this print without recalling
‘exquisite memories and irs that blew from a
terrestrial paradise. But Michael Scotts
noisy amorous novel of adventure was an
extraordinary book to put in the hands of a
child who had never been allowed to glance at
‘the mildest and most febrfugal story-book.

1 was lke giving a glass of brandy neat to

 

 
FATHER AND SON
some one who had never been weaned from 1

lk diet. have not read Tom Cringle's
Log” from that day to this, and Think that
T should be unwilling now to break the ehaem
‘of memory, which may be largely ilusion.
But Tremember a great deal of the plot and
not alittle of the language, and, while 1 am
sure itis enchantingly spirited, Tam quite as
Sure thet the persons it describes were fir
from being unspotted by the world. ‘The
‘scenes at night in the streets of Spanish Town
surpassed not merely my experienee, but,
‘thank goodness, my imagination, The nauti
pensonages used, in their conversations, what
called “a elas of language,” and there ra, if
Lam not mistaken, a glow and gust of life
through the romance from beginning to end
which was nothing if it was not resolutely
ag.

“There were certain scenes and images in
“Tom Cringle's Log” which made not merely
‘lasting impression upon my mind, but tinged
‘my outlook upon life. The long adventures,
fightings and escapes, sudden storms without,

in rane forth as they were
snely with great skil, upon the fry blue of
the boundless tropical ocean, produced on my
inner mind a sort of glimmering hope, very

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
vaguely flt at fest, slowly developing, long
Stationary and faint, but always tending
‘towards a balef that T should escape at last
from the narrowness ofthe life we led at home,
from this bondage to the Law and the
Prophets.

must not define too clearly, or endes‘our too formally to insist on the blind move‘ments ofa childish mind. ut of this T am
quite sure, that the reading and re-reading
‘of Tom Cringl’s Log" did more than any~
‘thing clic, in this ertinl eleventh year of my
life, to give fortitude to my individaslity,
which was in great danger—as I now see—of
‘succumbing to the pressure my Father brought
‘0 bear upon it from all sides. My soul was
shut up, like Fatime, in a tower to which no
‘external influences could come, and it might
really have heen starved to death, or have lst
the power of recovery and rebound, if my
‘eaptor, by some fresk not yet perfectly
‘accounted for, nd not gratuitously opened a
Title window in it and added a powerful
telescope. The daring chapters of Michael
‘Scotts presque romance ofthe topies were
that telescope and thet window.

Tn the spring of this year, 1 began to alk
bout the village and even proceed for con

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
siderable distances into the country by myself,
fand fter reading "Tom Cringle’s Log” those
cexpelitons were accompanied by a constant
hope of meeting with some adventures. I did
fot court events, howerer, except in faney, for
was very shy of eal people, and would break
‘off some gallant dream of prowess on the high
seas to bolt into a feld and hide behind the
hedge, while a couple of labouring men went
by. Sometimes, however, the wave of «great
purpose would bear me on, as when once, but
certainly at an endlier date than T have now
reached, hearing the dangers of a persistent
Arought much dwelt upon, 1 arsed my small
red wateing-pot, fll of water, up tothe top
‘of the village, and then all the way down
Petit-tor Lane, and discharged its contents in
‘cornfield, hoping by this act to improve the
Drospects of the harvest, A more eventfil
‘excursion must be described, beenuse of the
‘moral impression it left indelibly upon me.

T have deseribed the sequestered and beautifol hamlet of Barton, to which Twas so often
taken visting by Mary Grace Burmington. At
‘Warton there lived a couple who were objets
fof peculiar interest to me, because of the
rather odd fet that having come, oat of pare
curiosity, to see me baptized, they hed been

8

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
then and there deeply convinced of their
spiritual danger. These were John Brooks,
fh Trish quarryman, and bie wife, Ann Brooks.
‘These people had not merely been hitherto
‘unconverted, but they had openly treated the
Brethren with anger and contempt. ‘They
came, indeed, tomy baptism to mock, but they
went away impressed

‘Next morning, when Mrs, Brooks was at
the wash-tub, as she told us, Hell opened
ft her feet, and the Devil came out holding’ long seroll on which the list of her
sins was writen. She was so much excited,
that the emotion brought about a miscarriage
and she was seriously ill, Meanwhile, her
Thusband, who had been equally moved st the
‘baptism, was also converted, and as soon as
she was well enough, they were baptized
together, and then "broke bread” with us.
‘The ease of the Brookses was much talked
bout, and was attributed, in. distant sense,
to me; that is to say, 1 had not been an
object of public euviosity, the Brookses might
hhave remained in the bond of iniquity. 1,
‘therefore, took « very particular interest in
them, and as I presently heard that they were
‘extremely poor, [ was filled with a fervent
Tonging to minister to their necessities.

eo

 
FATHER AND SON

Somebody had lately given me a present of
noney, and T begged litle sums here and
there ‘ntl I reaghed the very considerable
figure of seven shillings and sixpence. With
these coins safe in a Tile linen bag, 1 stared
‘one Sunday afternoon, without saying anything,
to any one, and I arived at the Trookses
cottage in Barton. John Brooks was a heavy
dirty: man, with a pock-marked face and two
Teft legs his broad and red face eneried sonal
side-whiskers in the manner of that day, bat
‘was otherwise shaved. When T reached the
cottage, husband and wie were at home, doing
nothing at all in the approved Sunday style.
Twas reosived by them with some surprise,
Dut Fquickly explained my mission, and produced my linen bag. ‘To my disgust all John
Brooks said was, “I knowd the Lord would
provide,” and after emptying my lite bag into
‘he palm of an enormous hand, he swept the
contents into his trousers pocket, and slapped
his leg, Hesaid not onesingle word of thanks
‘or appreciation, and T was absolutely ut to
the heat

T think that in the course of « long life I
have never experienced a bitterer disappoint:
iment. ‘The woman, who was quieker, and
more sensitive, doubtless saw my ember.

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
rassment, but the form of comfort which she
those was even more wounding to my pride,
“Never mind, litle master,” she said, "you
stull come and see me feed the pigs.” But
there it limit to endurance, and with x sense
of having been cruelly’ torn by the tooth of
Ingetitude, I fled from the threshold of the
rookses, never to return.

"At ten thst afternoon, T was very much
owncast, and under cross examination from
‘Miss Marks, all my little story eame out. My
Rather, who bad been floating away in a
‘meditation, as every often did, exught a word
‘ut interested him snd descended to conscious
ness. Thad to tell my tale over again, this
time very sadly, and with a fear that should
be reprimanded, But on the contrary, both
my Father and Miss Marks were aitentive
fn most sympathetic, and I was much eomforted, "We must remember they are the
Lond’ children," said my Father. Eyen the
Tord cant ake a silk purse out ofa sow's ear,”
said Miss Marks who as considerably ruled
“Alas! alas” replied my Father,
hand with a deprocating gesture.
chill?” sid Miss Marks, bristling with indignation, and patting my hand across the teafable. “The Lord will reward your zealous

0

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
loving care of his poor, even if they have
neither the geace nor the knowledge to thank
You," said may Father, and rested his brown
‘yes meltingly upon me, rates!” sid Miss
Marks, thinking of John and Mary Brooks.
“Oh no! no!” replied my Father, “but
Ihewers of wood and dravters of water! We
rust hear with the limited intelligence.” AIL
this was an emollient to my wounds, and I
bbeeame consoled. But the springs of benevolence were dried up within me, and to this day
have never entirely recovered from the shock
‘of John Brooks's coarse ler and his" knowd
the Lord would provide." he infant plant
‘of philanthropy was burned in my bosom as
by quicktime,

In the course of the summer, a young
schoolmaster called on my Father to announce
‘to blm that he had just opened a day-school
{or the sons of gentlemen in ou viinity, and
the hegged for the favour of visit My
‘Father returned his eal; he lived in one of
‘the small white vila, buried in Inurel, which
_guvea disrect animation to our neighbourhood,
‘Mr- M, was frank and modest deferential tomy
Father's opinions and yet expuble of defending
his own. His school and he produced an
excellent impression, and in August T begen
FATHER AND SON

tw be one of his pupils. ‘The school was very
informal; it was Held in the two principal
Adwelling-rooms. on the ground-floor of ‘the
villa, and T do not remember that Mr. ML. ad
‘any help from an usher.

"There were perhaps twenty boys in the
School at most, and often fewer, T made
the exeunsion betsreen home and school four
times a day; if 1 walked fast, the transit
might take five minutes, and, a there were
several objets of interest inthe veay, i
right be spread over an hour. In fine
‘weather the going to and fiom school was
very delightful, and small as the seope of it
‘was it could be varied almost indefinitely.
‘would sometimes meet with  schoolfellow
proceeding in the same direction, and my
Father, observing us over the wall one moring, was amused to notice that T always
progressed by dancing slong the eurbstone
Sideways, my fice tured inwards and my
farms beating ageinst. my legs, conversing
Toualy all the time. This was « cise of pure
heredity, for so he used to go to his school,
forty yeas before, along the streets of Poole.

‘One day when fortunately T was alone, T
‘was accosted by an old gentleman, dressed as
4 dissenting minister. He was pleased with

 

 
PATHER AND SON
my replies, and he presently made it habit to
be taking his constitutional when T was likely
to be on the high road. We became grett
fiends, and he took me at last to his house,
very modest place, where to my great
there ung in the dining-00m,
‘oro lange portraits, one of a man, the other of
‘8 woman, in extravagant fancy-dress. My
‘ld friend told me that the former was a
Picture of himself as he hd appeared, long
‘go, in my nconverted days, on the stage.”
Twasso ignorant asnotto have the slightest
‘conception of what was meant by the stage,
snd he explained to me that he had been an
ctor and 2 poet, before the Lord had opened
his eyes to better things. I knew nothing
bout tor, but poets were already the
‘objects of my veneration. My friend was
the fist post I hnd ever seen. He was no
Jess a person than James Sheridan Knowles,
the famous author of Vinginiwr and The
Hunchback, who bad become x Baptist
minister in his old age, When, at home, 1
mentioned this acquaintance, it awakened no
interest. Uheieve that my Father had never
head, or never noticed, the name of one who
had been by far the most eminent, English
playwright ofthat age.

 

 

  
FATHER AND SON

Tewas from Sheridan Knowles’ lips that 1
first heaed fall the name of Shakespeare. He
‘was suprised, I fancy to find me so curiously
Advanced in some branches of knowledge, snd
So utterly ignorant. of others. He could
hardly credit that the names of Hoalet and
Falstaff and Prospero meant nothing toa litle
boy who knew so. much theology anu. geo‘graphy as I did. Mr, Knowles sugested that
Tshould ask my schoolmaster to. read some
fof the plays of Shakespeare with the boy’,
fand he proposed The Merchant of Venice 9
particularly well-suited for this purpose. 1
repeated what my aged friend (Mr. Sheridan
[Knowles must have been nearly eighty a that
tine) bad sd, and Mr. M. accepted the idea
with promptitude, (All my memories of thie
iy eavliest schoolmaster present him to me as
intelligent, amiable and quick although Think
not very soundly prepared for his profession.)

‘Accordingly, it was announced thst the
reading of Shakespeare would be one of our
Tesons, and on the following afternoon we
Degan The Merchant of Venice, There. was
‘one large volume, and it was handed about
‘he else; I was permitted to ead the part of
Bassanio, and I set forth, with ecstatic pipe,
how

 
FATHER AND SON

In Bante ay ly ey

‘Beh ey so Sar ak wo
‘Mr. M, must have had some fondness for the
stage himself; his pleasure in the Shakespeare
scenes was obvious, and nothing else that he
taught me made so much impresion on me as
‘what he sid about « proper emphasis in read
ing aloud. I was in the seventh heaven of deTight, but alas we had only reached the second
act of the play, shen the readings mysteriously
Stopped. Inever knew the cause, bt I su
pect that it was at my Father's desire. He
prided himself on never having read « page of
Shakespeare, and on never hving entered
theatre but once. I think I mast have spoken
st home about the readings, and tht he must
Ihave given the schoolmaster « hint to return to
the ordinary school curricular.

"The fact that Iwas a believer” as it was
‘our custom to eal one who bad! been admitted
to theareana of our religion, snd that there=
fore, in all commerce with * unbeievern” i
‘was my duty to be «testifying for my Lord,
in season and out of season," this prevented
‘my forming any intimate fiendships at my
first school. Ishrank from the trlsome and.
cemburrissing act of button-holing a schoolTellow as he rushed out of elas, and of pres.

 

 

 

   
FATHER AND SON
ing upon him the probably snintellgible
question “ Have you found Jesus!” Tt was
simpler to avoid him, to slip like a lard
‘through the laurels and emenge into. sol
‘ude,

‘The boys had way of plunging out into
‘the road in frontof the shootin when afer.
noon school was over; it asa pleasant rare
road lined with high hedges and shadosred by
m-tives, Here, especially towanls the
‘summer twilight, they used to linger and play
Vague games, swooping and whiding in the
declining sunshine, and T used to join these
btlike sports, But my company, though
rot avoided, was not greatly sought for. 1
think that something of my curious history
‘was known, and tht Twas, not unkindly,
Dut instinctively, avoided, as an animal of a
diffrent species, not allied to the herd. ‘The
‘conventionalty of litte boys is constant; the
colour of thee traditions is uniform, At the
‘ime time, although I made no frends, 1
found no enemies. In class, except in my
extraordinary aptitude for geography, whieh
‘was looked upon as incomprehensible and
almost uncanny, I was rather behind than in
front of the others. 1, therefore, awakened
no jeslouses, and, intent on my own dreams,

    

  

  
FATHER AND SON
[think my little shadowy presence escaped
the notice of most of my seheofellows.

Ty the side of the road [ have mentioned,
between the seool and my home, there was
Inge horse-pond. ‘The hedge folded round
three sides of it, while ancient pollard elms
Dent over it, and’ chequered. with ther folinge
in it the rellection of the sky. "The roxdside
‘eige of this pond was my favourite station;
it consisted of a hard clay which could be
‘moulded into fisy tenacious forms. Here I
created maitime empire—ishnds, w seaboard with harbours, ighthouses, fortifications.
My geographical imitativeness hed its full
sowing. Sometimes, while T was creating, a
fart would be driven roughly into the pond,
fand a horse would drink deep of my ocean,
his hooves trampling my archipelagoes and
shattering my ports with What was worse than
‘typhoon. But T immediately set to work,
‘a oon as the cart was gone nnd the mud had
Setiled, to tidy up my coustline again and to
Seoop out anew my harbours

‘My pleasure in this sport was endles, and
what I'was able to see, in my mind’ eye, was
hot the edge of morass of mud, buta splendid
Tine of cous, and gulis of the type of Tor Tay.
do not recollect sharper double humiliation

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘than when old Sam Lamble, the blacksmith,
who was one ofthe saints,” beng asked by my
Father whether he hd met me, replied “Yes,
T aeed un up-long, making mud pies in the
road!” What position for one who had
‘heen received into communion as an adult!”
What « blot on the seutsheon of a would-be
Columbus! « Mudie,” indeed |
Yet I had an appreciator. One afternoon,
‘as Twas busy on my geographies! operations,
‘good-looking middle-aged lady, with a soft
pit cheek and» sparkling hazel eye, paused
‘nl asked me if my name was not what it was,
Td seen her before; a stranger to our parts,
with voice without «tree tof the Devon.
Shire drawl, 1 Knew, dimly, that she came
Sometimes to the meeting, that she was Todgfing at Upton with some fiends of ours who
accepted paying guests in an old house that
twas simply a basket of roses, She was Miss
Brighten, and I now conversed with her for
the frst time
“Her interest in my harbours and islands
was marked; she didnot smiles she asked
questions sbout- my peninsulas which were
gent and pertinent, Twas even per
stunded at last £0 leave my creations and to
‘yall with her towards the village. Twas

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
pleased with her voiee, her refinement, her
ress, which was ‘more deliete, and” her
‘manners, which were more easy, than what T
‘was accustomed to, We had some very
pleasant conversation, and when we parted 1
Ihud the stisuction of feeling that our inter
sourse had been both agreenble to me and
Instretivetoher, I tld her tit I should be
‘gad to tell her moreon future occasion; she
‘thanked me very gravely, andithen she laughed
‘little, T-eonfes T aid not see that there was
aything to laugh at. We parted on warm
‘terms of mutual ester, but T litle thought
‘hat this sympathetic Quakerish lady was to
become my stepmother.

 
CHAPTER X

1 suner in litle bed in eaener of the room,
tnd my Father in the ancestral four-poster
rarer to the door. Very early one. bright
September moming at the close of my eleventh
yeu, my Father ealled me over to him. 1
‘imbed up, and was snugly wrapped in the
coverid; and then we held « momentous eonvenation. It began abruptly by his asking
me whether T should like to have «new
mamma. I was never a sentimentalist, and 1
therefore answered, canny, that that would
Alepend on who she was. He paried this,
tnd announced thet, eny way, anew mamma

Las sure to like her. Stil in
‘non-commital mood, L asked: Will she go
‘with me to the back ofthe line-kiln ?" "Ths
question caused my Father a great bewilderent. I had to explain that the ambition
of my life was to go up behind the limekila
fon the top of the hill that hung over Barton,

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘8 spot which was forbidden ground, being
locally held one of extreme danger. “Oh! 1
daresay she will" my Father then sad, bat
{you most guess who she i.” T guessed one
‘or two of the les comely ofthe female sins,"
tnd, this embarrassing my Father,—since the
Second T mentioned was a marred woman
‘who kept a sweetshop in the vilage,—Ie cut
amy inquiries short by saying, “Tt is Miss
Bright wen.”

So far so good, and 1 was well pleased,
ut unfortunately T remembered that it was
my duty to testify “in season and out of
season.” [therefore asked, with much earnest
nest, “But, Papa, is she one of the Lord's
childven 1” He replied, with gravity, that
She wes, “Has she taken up her eross in
baptism?" 1 went on, for this was my own
strong point aa believer. My Father looked
‘little shane-faced, and replied: “ Well, she
bas not as yet seen the necessity of that, but
‘we must pray that the Lord may make her
way clear before her. You se, she as been
Trought up, hitherto, in the sowed’ Church
of England.”

(Our positions were now curiously changed.
It seemed as if it were 1 who was the
Jealous monitor, and my Father the depee
  

 

 

   

 
FATHER AND SON
cating penitent. Tat up in the cover, and
shook a finger at him. "Papa," 1 said,
“don't tell me that she's a pedobaptist 2” T
ha lately acquired that valuable word, and 1
‘zed this remarkable opportanity of using i
Te affected my Father prinflly, but he re
peated his assurance that if we united ou
prayers, and set the Seripture plan plainly
Defore Miss Brightwen, there could be no
oubt that she would see her way to accepting
the doctrine of adult baptism. And he ssid
we must judge not, lest we ourselves be
Judged. Thad just enough tact to let that
poss, but I was quite aware that our whole
system was one of judging, and that we had
no intention whatever of being judged ox
selves, Yet even at the ageof eleven one sors
that on certain occasions to press home the
truth is not convenient.

“Just before Christmas, on a piecing night
of frost, my Father brought to us his brid
‘The muartening up of the house, the new
farniture, the removal of my own possessions
to a private bed-room, the wedding gits of
the “suits,” all Use things paed in interest
before the fact Uhat Miss Marks had made a
‘soene," in the course of the afteroon.  T
‘was daneing about the daseing-roou, and was

 

  

 
FATHER AND SON
saying: “Oh! Tam so glad my new Mamma

when Miss Marks ealled out inn.
‘unnatural voice, “Ob! you eruel eid.” 1
Stopped in amazement and stared at_he
‘whereupon she threw prudence to the winds,
and moaned: T onee thought 1 should be
‘your dear mamma.” I was simply stupefied,
‘and I expressed my horor in terms that were
clear and strong. ‘Thereupon Miss Masksad
wild ft of hysterics, while [looked
on, wholly unsympathetic and still deeply
aifronted. She was right; T was ervel alas!
but then, what silly woman she had bee
The consequence was that she withdrew
ins moist and quivering condition to her
boudoi, where she had locked herself in when
Tall smiles and eareses, wns weleoming the
bride and bridegroom on the doorstep a8
politely as if T had been a valued old family
‘etaner.

‘My stepmother immediately beeumne a
great ally of mine. She was never a tower of
strength to me, but atleast she was always
Todge in my gueden of eucumbers. She was 8
very wellimenning pious Indy, but she was not
‘finatie, and her mind did not naturally revel
in spiritual aspirations, Almost her only social
fut was that she was sometimes a litle fret=

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
fal; this was the way in whieh her bruised
Individuality asserted tse. But. she was
aiféctioste, serene, and above all. refined
er refinement was extraordinarily pleasant to
‘my nerves, on which much else our suroundings jared.

How life may have jarred, poor insulated
Indy, on her during’ her frst experience of
our life at the Room, I know not, but 1 think
she was a philosopher. She had, with sue.
prising rashes, and in opposition to the
wishes of every member of her own family,
taken her cake, and nov she recognised that
she must eat it to the last crumb, Over her
Wishes and prejudices my Father exercised 2
constant, cheerful and quiet presure. He
‘was never unkind or abrapt, but he went on
‘adding avoindupois until her will gave way
lander the sheer weight. Even to public immension, which, as was natural in & shy and
sensitive Indy of advancing years, she regerded
‘with horror whieh was long. insurmounttble,—even to baptism she yielded, and my
Father had the joy to announce to the Saints
fone Sunday morning at the breaking of bread
that “'my beloved wife has een able at length
tosee the Lord's Willin the matter of baptism,
snd wil testify to the faith whieh in hee on

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘Thursday evening next.” No wonder my
stepmother was sometimes fetul

(On the physica side, 1 owe her an endless
debt of gratitude. Her relations, who objected strongly to her marrage, had told her,
among other pleasant prophecies, that the
fist thing you wil have to do will be to bury
tat poor child” Under the old-world sway
‘of Miss Marks, Id slept Beneath a load of
blankets, had never gone out save sighted
‘with great cost snd comforter, and had. been
protected from fresh ar as irom a pestilence.
With real courage my stepmother reversed
all this. My bed-room window stood. wide
open all night long, wmps were done away
with, or exchanged for flannel garments next
the skin, and T was urged to be out and about
‘as much as posible,

Allthe quidnunes among the saints shook
their heads ; Mary Grace Burmington litle
‘embittered by the downfall of her Marks, made
‘solemn remonstrance to my Father, who,
however, allowed my stepmother to extry out
Iherexcellentplan, Myhealth responded rpidly
to this ehange of rig, but increase of health
id not bring increase of spirituality. My
Father, filly occupied with moulding the wil
snd inlaming the piety of my stepmother, left

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
sme now oder not precedent n unitered pomension of my own devices Id nt
Tove my th, ut many oer things tok
prominent place in ty tind

Te wil spore ited tht thre i
ao greater proof of complete religions sineity
than fervour in pra peer If an in
iu alone by the sie of hie bed, prolongs
Ii inbercentons, Hers wrestling’ With He
divine Companion, a wll ot eae of eit
he as wat he bellevr to be evidence of
reply to his entreaties —then, no ttter what
the cbnracier of his public protestations, or
‘rat the fy of his ations i i absolutely
‘eran hat he believes in wht e poems

‘My Pather prayed in private in what I may
atmo call spn of violence. He entreated
for apitoal guidance with nothing las than
importuniy. might bes tht he
stormed the eitadls of Gods grace refising
to be baled, urging Is Intercnons without
tnerey upon a Deity who sometimes struck me
‘ inttentve to his payers or wesred hy
them. My Fathers nes of supplication aT
ted to witness them at nights when Tae
apposed to be sleep, were accompanied by
Ses wuket te kaa by cua
the oat ofthe lagers by dep brenthings by

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘murmutous sounds which seemed just break
ing out of silence, like Vingi's bees out of the
hive, magnisclamoridus. My Father fortified
his religious life by prayer as an. athlete does
this physical life by lung-gymnastis and
vigorous rubbings.

Te was a trouble to my conscience that T
‘ould not emulate this fervour, The poverty
‘of my prayers had now long been a souree of
distress to me, but T gould not discover how
‘to enrich them. My Father used to warn us
very solemnly against *lip-serviee,” by which
hhe ‘meant singing hymns of experience and
joining in ministrations in whieh our hearts
‘took no vital or personal part. This was an.
‘outward act, the tendency of which T could
well appreciate, but there was a «lip-srviee”
leven more deadly than that, against which it
never occurred to him to wam me, Teassiled
te when I had come alone by my bedside,
‘nd had blown out the candle, and had sunken
fon my knees in my night-gown. “Then it was
‘that my deadness made itself felt, in the
‘mechanical address I put up, the emptiness of
my language, the absence of all real unetion.

T never could contrive to. ask God for
spiritual gifts in the same voice and sprit in
which T could ask human being for objects

6

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘which I knew he could give me and which 1
‘earnestly desired to possess. ‘That sense of
the reality of intereesion was for ever denied
me, and it was, I now see, the stigma of my
want of faith, But at the time, of course,
suspected nothing of the kind, and 1 tied
to keep up my zeal by a desperate mental
logging, as if my soul had been peg-top.

Tn nothing did T gain from the advent of
my stepmother more than in the encouragement she gave tomy friendships with a group
of boys of my own age, of whom T had now
lately formed the acquaintance. ‘These frien
ships she not merely tolerated, but fostered;
‘teas even due to her kind arrangements that
‘they took a eertain set form, that our exeursions started from this house or from that on
regular days. I hardly know by what stages
eased to be lonely little erature of mockmonographs and. miid-pies, and became
‘member of a sort of club of eight or ten active
boys. The long summer holidays of 1861
were set in an enchanting brightness.

‘Looking beck, I cannot see a cloud on the
‘erestrialhorigon—I see nothing but ablaze of
sunshine ; desents of slippery grass to moons
‘of snov-white shingle, cold to the bare flesh ;
‘ed promontories running out into a sex that

3 .

 
FATHER AND SON
‘waslike sapphire send our happy elan climbing,
Ibuthing, bosting lounging, chattering, all the
hot day through. Once more T have to
record the fact, which T think is not without
Interest, that precisely as my life ceases to be
solitary, i ceases to be distinc. I have no
dliicuty in recalling, with the minuteness of
‘a photograph, seenes in which my Father and
T were the sole actors within the four walls of
4 room, but of the glorious life among wild
boys on the margin of the sea T have nothing
‘bat vague and broken impressions, delicious
and ilsive
Te was a remarkable proof of my Father's
temporary lapse into indulgence that he made
no efort to thwart my intimacy with these
‘my new companions, Hewat in an unusually
humane mood himself. THis marriage was one
proof of it; another was the composition at
time of the most picturesque, easy and
‘graceful of al his writings, "The Romance of
Natural History” even now a sort of clase.
Everything combined to make him believe
that the blessing of the Lord was upon him,
‘and to clothe the darkness of Une world with
at least a mist of rose-colour, 1 do not
recollect that ever at this time he bethonght
hiro, when I started in the moming for «long
a

 

 

 

    
FATHER AND SON
Ay with my friends on the edge ofthe sa, to
remind me that T must speak to them, in
season and out of setson, of the Blood of
Jess. “And I, young coward that Kas, let
sleeping dogmas lie

My companions were not all of them the
sons of saints in our communion; their parents
Velonged to thet profesional clk which we
were only now beginning to attract to our
Services. They were brought up in religious,
‘but notin fanatical, ulin, and Twas the only
converted” one among them, Mrs. Paget,
‘of whom I shall have present to spel, charac
‘eristially sid that i grieved her to see “one
lamb among so many kids.” But « kid "isa
word of varied signieance, and the symbol
did not seem to ws effectively applied. Asa
matter of fact, we made what T stil feel was
fan excellent tacit compromise. My young
‘companions never jered at me for being in
‘communion with the ssints," and I, on my
Dirt, never urged the Atonement upon them.
Tegan, in fact, more and more to keep my
own religion for use on Sundays.

Tt will, T hope, have been observed. thi
among the very curious grown-up people into
‘whose company T was thrown, although many
‘were fil and some were foolish, none 0 fat

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
ss Toan discor, were hypocritical, 1am not
‘one of those who believe that hypocrisy is a
vice that grows on every bush. OF course, in
religious more than it any other matter,
there isu perpetual contradiction between our
thoughts and our deeds which is inevitable to
fur social order, and is bound to lead to
“ette tromperie mutuelle” of which Pas
speaks. But T have often wondered, while
‘admiring the splendid portrait: of ‘Tartufe,
‘whether such » monster eter, oF at least often,
thas walked the stage of life; whether Moliore
‘observed, or only invented him.

"To adopt scheme of religious pretension,
‘with no belief whatever inits being true, merely
for sensuons advantage, openly acknowledging
toone'sinner self th brazen system of deceit, —
sucha course may, nd doubtless has been, todden, yt surely much less Frequently than ey
love to suggest. But at the juncture which 1
Ihave now reached in my narrative, I had the
advantage of knowing’ «person who. was
branded before the whole word, and punished
by the law of his country, as a felonious
hypocrite. My Father himself could. only
sigh and sdmit the charge And yet—1
aoubt, °

“About half-way between our village and

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘the town there lay comfortable villa
Inhabited. by a retived solicitor, or perhaps
attomey, whom 1 shall name Mr. Dormant.
We often called at his half-way house, and,
although he was a member of the town:
meeting, he not unfrequentiy eame up to us
for “the breaking of bread.” Mr. Dormant
‘was a solid, pink man, of a cory habit. He
Thad henntiful white bain, a very soft voice,
anda welcoming, wheedling manner be was
extremely fluent and zealous in using the
pious phraseology of the sect. My Father
hud never been very much attmeted to him,
tout the mun professed, and 1 think felt, an
overwhelming’ admiration” for my Father,
Mr, Dormant. was not very well of and in
the previous year he had persuaded an aged
gentleman of wealth to come and board. with
fim, When, in the course of the winter,
this gentleman died, much surprise. was felt t
the report that he had left almost his entire
fortune, which was not inconsderable, to Mr.
Dormant.

‘Much surprise—for the old gentleman had
‘son to whom he had always been warmly
Attached, who was far away, I think in South
‘Ameriw, practising a perfectly respectable profession of which his father entirely approved.

 
FATHER AND SON
My own Father always preserved a delioney
and sense of honour about money: whieh
could not ve been more sensitive if he
hhad been an ungodly man, and I am very
‘much pleased to remember that when the
Tegney was first spoken of, he regretted that
Mr. Dormant should have allowed the old
gentleman to make this will, If he knew the
Intention, my Father ssid, it would have
shown a more proper sense of his responsibility
if he had dismnded the testator from s0
‘unbecoming a disposition. That was long
before any legal question arose; and now Mr.
Dormant eame into his fortune, and began to
‘make handsome gifts to missionary societies,
tnd to his own meeting in the town, If T do
‘not mistake he gave, unsolicited, a sum to our
‘ullding fund, which amy Father afterwards
retumed, Hut in process of time we heard
thatthe son had come back from the
“Antipodes, and was ‘making investigations
efore we knew where we were, the news
burst upon us, ike a bombshell, thet Me
Dormant had been arrested on a erzingl
shurge and vas now in gool at Exeter
Sympathy was at fst _much extended
amongst us to the prisoner. But it was
Tessened when we understood that the old

 

 
FATHER AND SON
gentleman had een converted "while under
‘Dormant’s roof, and had given the fact that
his son was “an unbeliever” as reason for
Aisinherting hima. All doubt was set aside
‘when it was divulged, under pressure, by the
nurse who attended on the old gentleman, her
self one of the “saints” that’ Dormant’ had
traced the signature to the will by drawing
the fingers ofthe testator over the document
when he was already and finally comatose.
My Father, setting aside by strong effort
of will the repugnanice which he fl, visited
the prisoner in guol before this final evidence
hud een extracted. When he returned he sid
that, Dormant appeared to be enjoying a. perfeet confidence of heart, and had expressed «
sense of his joy and pence in the Lords my
Father regretted that he had not been able to
persuade him to admit any eror, even of judg
ent. But the prisoner’ attitude in the dock,
‘when the facts were proved, and not by him
Aenied, was still more extraordinary. He
‘oul be induced to exhibit no species of re
‘morse, and, tothe obvious anger of the judge
himself, sited that head only done his duty
5 Christian, in preventing this wealth from
‘coming into the hands of an ungodly man, who
‘would have spn i in the serve ofthe flesh

 

 

 
PATHER AND SON
and of the devil, Steraly reprimanded by the
Judge, he made the final statement that at that
very moment he was conscious of his Lord's
presence, in the dock at his side, whispering to
him * Well done, thou good and faithful servant" Tn this frame of conscience, and with
‘glowing countenance, he was hurried away to
penal servitude.

This was very puinfol incident, and it is
‘easy to sce how compromising, how erul, it
‘was in its effect upon our communion what
‘oceasion it gave to our enemies to blaspheme,
No one, in either meeting, could or would
raise a voice to defend Mr. Dormant. We
hhed to bow our heads hen we met our
‘enemies in the gate, ‘The blow fell. more
heavily on the meeting of which he had heen
‘prominent and communicating member, but
it fll on us too, and my Father fel it severely,
For many years he would never mention the
man's name, and he refused all discussion of
the ineident.

‘Yet I was never sure and T am not sure
row, that the wretched being was « hypocrite.
‘There are as many vulger fanatics a5 there
fare distinguished ones, and T am not conVineed thet Dormant, coarse and narrow a5
he was, may not have’ sincerely believed tht

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Iwas beter fe the money to wed nv
Ton popenaa an ine pate of he
ect Wh be cen tated = ey
Sse ge eerie er
Sat it awakenot in ty rind for the fet
fie, « db whether Gor exclave ton
Of thes was an etielyalutary ony i i
Sey Sara
oleae pieced os abe o)
Father hme ad denounces dishonor
‘Ble and grec
‘My stepmother brought with her a ite
Help micas epee ars
sean but wich yet were Keown to all the
fret clot Prominent aneong thee
tur st okie pou of Walter Set, and
Tie ewes gaily Sd pect!
spit of compronian my Reter sat dono
Its tin rd thee rks aloud to my ep
froin he qua ping evenings The
Iva sort of aaron ofcoursip, «tute
Sg te tele voy eatin cod
She wont nett, hr work
Tix le ba hinge pte forth the
fever at ber Ike 8 Mackie, Ts aot
Conteed ix is tangent wich ae
‘rly mation, but Tas present, ad
the ciercbe mele wore ipeeaion upon

 
FATHER AND SON
‘me than it did upon either of the prinipal
‘gents

‘My Pether read the verse admirably, with a
fall,~some people (but not I) might say with
‘too full—a perception ofthe metreas well as of
the rhythm, rolling out the rhymes and glorying in the proper names. He begaa, and it
was a happy choice, with "The Lady of the
Lake.” It gave me singular pleasure text
his lange voiee do justice to “Duneramnon
‘and “ Cambos-Kenneth,” and wake the echoes
with “Roderigh Vieh Alphine dho, bot
foroe!” Talmost gasped with excitement,
while « shudder flosted down my backbone,
‘when we exe tor

‘sla ing rh
‘hn he prey pom mre Wrox wan,
(On Basa bo,

passage which seemed to me to achieve the
ideal of sublime romance. My thoughts
were occupied all day long with the adven:
tures of Fitzjames and the denizens of Ellen's
Tale. Tt became an obsession, and when Tas
asked whether T remembered the name of the
fottage where the minister of the Dible
Christians lodged, 1. answered, dreamy,
*Yes—Beala-nam-bo.”

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON

Seving me so much fascinated, thrown
indeed into a temporary frenzy, by the epic
poetry of Sir Walter Scott, my stepmother
Asked my Father whether T might tot start
reading the Waverley Novels. Duthe refused
to permit this on the ground that those tales
‘gave false and disturbing petares of life, and
‘would lead away my attention from heavenly
‘things. T do not fally apprehend what distinction he drew between the poems, which
he permitted, andthe novels, which he refuse,
But T suppose he regarded a work in verse a5
more artificial, and. therefore Tes likely to
‘make « realistic impression, than one in prose.
‘There is something qusint inthe eanscentious
seruple whieh slows “'The Lord of the Isles”
snd excludes “ Rob Roy.”

Tut stranger sil, and amounting almost to
‘whim, yas his sudden decision that, although
T might not touch the novels of Seott, I was
free to read those of Dickens. I recollect that
ry stepmother showed some surprise at this,
find that my Father explained to. her that
‘Dickens “ exposes the pasion of love in iicealous light.” Shedid not seem to follow this
recommendation, which indeed tends to the
altr-subtle, but she procured for me x copy
‘of “Pickwick,” by which T was instantly and

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
sloriouly enslaved. My shouts of laughing
atthe richer passages were almost seandalous,
tnd led to my being reproved for disturbing
my Father while engaged, in an upper room,
in the study of God's Word. I mast have
‘expended months onthe perl of Pickwick,”
for T-used to rush through «chapter, and
then read it over again very slowly, word for
word, and then shut my eyes to realise the
figures and the aetion.

T suppose no child will ever aguin enjoy that
raptine of untesisting humorous appreciation
fof Pickwick.” 1 felt myself tobe in the comtpany of « gentleman so extremely funny that
began to laugh before he began to speak ; no
sooner dd he remark “the sky was dask and
gloomy. the ar was dampand ra,” thin I was
in fits of laughter. My retinement in our se‘questered comer of lifemade me, perhaps, even
fn this matter, somewht old-fashioned, and
possibly Twas thelatest of the generation who
secepted Mr. Pickwik with an unquestioning
find hysterical abandonment. Certainly few
young people now seem sensitive, as I was,
‘and as thousands before me had been, to the
‘quality of his fascination.

Tt was curious that living in a household
‘where «certain delicate art of painting was

 

 
FATHER AND SON
diligently cultivated, Ihad yet never seen a
real picture, and was searcely familiar with
the design of one in engraving. - My step
‘mother, howerer, brought a favour of the fine
arts with her? a kind of aesthetic odour, ike
that of lavender, ching to her as she moved.
She had known authentic artists in her youth
‘she had watched Old Crome painting, and had
taken a course of dewwing-lessons from no less
© person than Cotman. She painted small
watercolourlandscapes herself, with a delicate
‘economy of means and a graceful Norwich
convention; her sketch-books were fled sith
abbeys gently washed in, riverbanks ia sepia
Dy which the elect might be dimly reminded
‘of Liber Studiorum, snd woodland scenes
‘over whieh the ghost of Creswiele hd faintly
‘breathed. Tt was not exciting sr, but it was,
0 far as it went, in its ladyclke reserve the
real thing. Oursea-enemones, our trope bins
‘our bits of spongy rock filed and sprayed
with corallines, had been very conscientious
tnd skilful, ut, essentially, so far as art was
‘concerned, the wrong thing.

‘Thus 1 begun to acquire, without under.
standing the value oft, some conception ofthe
legant phases of early English watercolour
pinting, and there was one singular ieee of a

=)

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
nace wel vimasing wth water anda greyahUe sky overt and dark-green poplar shaped
Tike wet brooms, menacing the mile distance,

ich Cotman hioself nd touched ; and this
Seemed betula curious tome int dim,
Alt fens, when it was hoisted to a place on
our drawing-room wall

Tut stil Thad ever seen a subjec-picare,
althoogh my stepmother ined t tall of the
5oys ofthe Royal Academy, and i wns there:
fore with a considerable sense of excitement
that T went, with my Father, to examine Me
Holman Hunts Finding of Chri in the
‘Temple which a this time was announced to
eon public show at our neighbouring town,
We paid our shilings and ascended with
other to an upper room, bare of every
tubing objet, in-which a strong topight
faked the lage and uncompromising pte.
‘We looked att for some time in silence, snd
then my Futher pointed out to me vais
eu, such a9 the phylactres and. the
titres abd the robes which distinguished the
igh priest

Some of the other visitor, as T recollect,
expremed astonishment and dislike of what
they caled the “Prerapalite" treatment but
wwe" were not affected by that Indeed, if

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
anything, the exact, minute and hard execution
fof Mz. Hunt wat in sympathy with the
methods we ourselves were in the habit of
‘using when we printed batteries and seu‘weeds, placing. perfectly. pure pigments side
by side, without any ‘nonsense about oliar‘scura. This lange, bright, comprehensive
Picture made a very deep impression upon
Ime, not exactly as a work of art, but asa
‘pilin natural specimen, Twat pleased to
thayexeen it as Tas plesed to have seen the
comet, and the whale which was brought to
four front door on a truck. It wis &_ pro
‘minent addition tomy experience.

"The slender expansions of my interest whieh
were now budding hither and thither do not
seem tohave alamned my Father at all. His
views. were short; if T appeared to be con‘tented and obedient, if I responded pleasntly
‘when he appealed to me, he was not concerned
ty discover the source of my cheerfulness. He
put it down to my happy sense ofjo'in Christ,
‘reflection of the sunshine of grace beaming
‘upon me through no intervening cloud of sn or
Aloubt. "The saints were, asa rte, very easy
to comprehend: their emotions lay upon the
surface. If they were gay itwas became they
hhed no burden on their consciences, while if

 

 
FATHER AND SON
they were depressed, the symptom might be depended pon as showing that ther consciences
‘were troubling them, and if they were indifferent and cold, it was certain that they were
losing their faith end becoming hostileto godlinies. Tt was almost a mechanieal matter with
‘these simple souls, But, although Twas 50
‘much younger, I was more complex snd more
crafty than the peasant saints.” My Father,
not a very subtle paychologist, applied to me
‘the same formulas which served him well at
the meeting, but in my cue the results were
Jess uniformly successful.
"The excitement of school-tife and the entof my civcle of interests, combined
‘tw make Sunday, by contest, « very tedious
‘occasion, ‘The absence of every species of
recreation on the Lord's Day grew to be a
Tourden which might scarcely be borne. T have
said that my freedom during the week had now
Tecome oonsiderable; if Iwas at home punetually at mou-times, the rest of my leisure was
not lulled, ut thie liberty, which inthe
‘summer holidays eame to surpass that of fishies
‘hat tipple inthe deep,” was put into more and
‘more painful contrast with the unbroken ser
vitude of Sunday.
‘My Father objected very strongly to the

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
expression Sabbuth-day as itis commonly used
by Presbyterians and others. He said, quite
justly, that it was ani =
‘vation, that Sabbath was Saturday, the seventh
ay of the week, not the frst, a Jewish
festival and not # Christan commemoration,
Yet his exaggerated view with regard to the
observance of the First Day, namely, Unt it
must be exchsively occupied with pubic
and private exercises of divine worship, was
Ibased much more upon a Jewish then upon
Christian law. In fact, T'do not remember
tat my Father ever produced a definite
argument from the New ‘Testament in suport of his excasive pasivity on the Lord's
Day. He followed the early Puritan pectice,
‘except that he didnot extend his observance,
a5 [believe the old Puritans did, from sunset
‘on Satunday to sunset on Sunday.

"The observance of the Lords Day. has
already become universally so lax that 1 think
there may be some value in preserving «n
‘accurate record of how our Sundays were spent
five and forty years ago. We came down to
brenkfast at’ the unial time. My’ Father
prayed briely before we began the meal; alter
1 the bell was rung, and, before the breakfast
was cleared away, we had a lengthy service of

  

 

 
FATHER AND SON
exposition and prayer with the servants, If
the weather was fine, we then walked about
‘the gutden, doing nothing, for about half an
hour. We then sat, each in separate room,
with our Hibles open and some commentary
fon the text beside and prepared our minds
for the morning service. Title before 11 a.m
wwe sulied forth, earring our Bibles and hytanbooks, and went through the moraing-service
fof two hours at the Room; this was the
‘entra event of Sunday.

‘We then came buck to dinner,—euiously
enough to a hot dinner, always, with x joint,
Yregetables and puddings, x0 that the cook at
Teast must have been busily at work, —and
fer it my Father and my stepmother took
‘8 nap, each in x diferent room, while T
slippel out into the garden for a litle while,
but never venturing further ald. In the
‘middle of the eftemnoon, my stepmother
fand I proceeded up the village to Sunday
‘School, where I was early promoted to the
tuition ofa few very litle boys. Weretumed
in time for tea, immediately after which we
all marched forth, again armed, es in the
‘morning, with Bibles and hymn-books, and
we went through the evening serve, at whieh
my Father preached, The hour was now

 

 
FATHER AND SON
already past my week-day bedtime, but we
hhad another service to attend, the Believers
Prayer Meeting, which commonly oseapied
forty minutes more Then we used to eteep
Thome, I often so tired that the weatinest was
like physiea! pain, and I was permitted, without
farther * worship," to slip upstairs to bed.

‘What made these Sundays, the observance
of which was absolutely. uniform, so peewTiel trying was that Twas not permite the
Indulgence’ of any secular respite. 1 might
‘ot open a scientific book, nor make a drawing,
‘nor examine a specimen. 1 was not allowed
to.go into the road, except to proceed with my
patents to the Room, nor to’ discuss worldly
subjects at meals, nor to enter the Tittle
chamber where I kept my treasures. wis
hotly and tightly dressed in Black, ll day ong,
8 though ready at any moment to attend =
funeral with decorum, Sometimes, towards
‘evening, I used to feel the monotony and
‘weariness of my postion to be almost unenGrable, but at this time T was meek, and T
‘bowed to what T supposed to be the order of
the universe.

 

 
CHAPTER XI

“As iy mental horizon widened, my Father
Tollowed the ditection of my spiritual eyes
with some bewilderment, and knew not at
whit T gazed. Nor could 1 have put. into
‘words, nor ean T even now define, the visions
which held my vague and. timid attention.
Asa child develops, those who regard it with
tendemess or impatience are seldom even
spproximately correct in their analysis ofits
melleetual. qnovements, largely beemuse, if
there is anything to record, it defies adult
Aefinition. One eurious freak of mentality T
‘must now mention, berause it took a conSiderable part in the enfranchisement of my
mind, or rather in the formation of my think
ing habits, But nether my Father nor my
stepmother knew what to make of it, and to
‘all the truth I hardly know what to mike of
itmysele

‘Among the books which my: new mother

o

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Iaad brought with her were vrtain editions of
the poets, an odd assortment. Campbell was
there, and Burs, and Keats and the "ales
of Byron. Each of these might have been
expected to appeal to me; but my emotion
‘was too young, and T aid not listen to them
Yet. Thein imperative voices called me later.
Dy the side of these romantic clasis stood a
small, thick volume, bound in blace morocoo,
and comprising four reprinted works of the
eighteenth century, gloomy, funereal pooms of
fan order as wholly out of date as are the
‘ros-bones and rafled cherubim on the gravestones in a country churehyard. The four—
fand in thie order, as T never shall forget —
‘were "The Last Day” of Dr, Young, Blsir's
"Grave," “Death” by Bishop Beilby Portus,
and The Deity” of Samuel Boyse. These
Iugubrious effusions, all in blank verse or in
the heroic couplet, reprevented, in its most
feduniant form, the artistic theology of the
tiddle of the eighteenth century. They
vere steeped in such vengeful and hortatory
sentiments as passed for elegant piety in the
reign of George U1.

How 1 enme to open this solemn volume
fs explained by the oppressive exclusiveness
‘of our Sundays. On the afternoon of the

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Lords Day, as T have already explined,
1 might neither walk, nor talk, nor ex:
plore our scientific brary, nor indulge in
furious fets of watercolour painting. "The
Plymouth-Brother theology which alone was
‘open to me produced, at length, and particulirly on hot afternoons, fkint physical

ries, a kind of seeret headache, But,
tting one day upon the doleful book of
verses, and observing its religious character, I
fsked “May T read that ?” and after @ bref,
fstonished glance at the contents, I received
0 certainly-—if you can!”

"The lawn doped directly from verandah
at our drawing-room window, and it con.
tained. two immense elme-troes, which ‘hed
‘originally formed part of the hedge of a
‘meadovt. In our tim and polished garden
they then remsined—they were soon after
wards ext down-rade and obtuse, with
something primeval about them, something
‘autochthonous they were like two peasant
fncestors surviving’ ina family ‘that had
advanced to gentility. ‘They rose each out of
‘steep tured hillock, and the root of one of
them wes long my fevourite summer readingdesk; for T could lie stretched on the lawn,
with my head and shoulders supported by the

    

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘lm:tree hillock; and the book in # fissure of
therough turf ‘hither then escaped with my
graveyard poets, and who shall explain the
rapture with which I followed their austere
morality?

Wihether I really reud consecutively in my
bluck-bound volume T can no longer be sure,
‘but i became a companion whose society 1
valued, and at worst it was a thousand times
more congenial to me than Jukes’ "On the
Apocalypse” or than a perfectly exeruciating
work ambiguously styled "The Javelin of
Phineas,” which lay smouldering in a dull red
‘over on the drawing-room table. 1 dipped
iy bucket here and there into my poets, and
T brought up strange things. T brought up
cout of the depths of «The Last Day” the
following ejaculation of a soul roused by the
‘rump of resurrection —

‘Tare fo lv me em nigh,

hes tls rset f thy igh?
Ps int being raven tee,

‘Aad id val ty?
1 read these lines with x shiver of excitement,
sand in a sense T suppose little intended by the
sanctimonious reetor of Welwyn. T abo read

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
in the same piece the surprising description of
how
Selene, sdvante—the net
‘The data nbd ge

but rejcte it as not wholly
testimony of Scripture
thetore’ and vigorous advance of Youngs
ene were pleasant to me Tellby Portes
Tdisared from te fist a impenetrable. In
“The Deity" knew noting then of the ie
preposterous author —
al pean,
Grave that realy delighted
te, and T fghtened myself with is melons
doef images in earnest

“About this time there was © rest low of
texte hospitality in the village, and my
frends and ther fends wed to be asked ot,
by respective psents and by more than one
ale spinster, to faint Hite entertainments
thee those sang who were sbions to sing
tnd where all played pont and forks afer a
ich tea My Father wes constantly exereised
in mind as to whether 1 should or should not
sccept these gltering. invitations. There
hovered before im « painful sense of danger

  

   

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
in resigning the soul to pleasures which
savoured of “the World” "These, though
apparently innocent in themselves, might give
fan appetite for yet more subvenive. dssipa
tions.

T remember, on one oceasion,—when the
Browns, & family of Baptists who kept
large haberdashery shop in the neighbouring
town, asked for the pleasure of my company
“to tea and games", end carried complacency
so fur ato offer to send that local vehile the
midge” to fetch me and bring me back,—my
Fathers conscience was so painfully perplexed,
tate desited me to come wp with hin to the
now-leserted “boudoir” af the departed
‘Marks, that we might “lay the matter before
the Lord.” We di so, kneeling side by side,
‘with our backs to the window and our foreheads
pressed upon the horsechair cover of thesmall
fofin-like sof. My Father prayed aloud,
‘vith great fervour, that it might be revealed
to me, by the voice of God, whether it was or
‘was not the Lovd's will that 1 should attend
the Browns’ party. My Father's attitude
seemed to me to be hardly fi, since be did
“hot seruple to remind the Deity of various
‘objections to a life of pleasure and of the
sakes that Hie bidden in the grass of evening

 

 
FATHER AND SON
pertics Tk would have been more serupulous,
T thought, to give no sort of hint of the kind
of answer he desied and expected.

Te will be josty sad that my life was made
Lup of very trifling things, since T ave to eonfess tht this incident ofthe Brown invitation
vwas one ofits landmarks, As T knelt, feeling
very small, by the immense bulk of my Father,
there gushed through my vein lke «wine the
Aetermination to rebel. Never before, in all
these years of my voeation, hed I felt my resSstance take precively this definiteform, We
rose presently from the sofa, my forehead snd
the backs of my hands sil chafed by the textute of the horsehair, and we faced one another
inthe dreary light. My Father, perfectly confientin the sicess of what Ind really been a
soft of incantation, ssked me in a Joud wheedTing voiee, * Well, and what is the answer
whieh our Lord vouehsafes "I said nothing,
nd so my Father, more sharply, continued,
‘We have asked Him to direct you to true
knowledge of His will. Wehave desired Him
to Tet you know whether iti oF is not, in
accordance with His wishes that you should
‘secept this invitation from the Browns." He
positively beamed down at me: he had no
Aloubt ofthe reply. He way already, I belie

  

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
planning some little treat to make up to me
forthe material deprivation. Tut my answer
caine, in the high-piping accents of despa
"The Lord says T may go to the Browns
My Father gazed at me in speechless horror.
‘He was eaught in his own trap, and though he
was certain thatthe Lord had sid nothing of
‘the kind, there was no road open for him but
just sheer retreat. Yet surely it was an error
in tactics to slam the door.

It was at this party at the Brown—to
which T duly went, although in sore di
grace—that- my ehumnel poets played me a
fiean trick. Tt was proposed that “our
young friends” should give their elders the
eat’ of repeating any” pretty pieces that
they knew by heart. Accordingly a little
fil rected Casabinea,” and another little
irl “We are Seven,” and various children
‘ete induced to repeat hynans, some rather
Tong,” as Calverley says, but all very mild
‘and innoeuously evangelical 1 was. then
asked by Mrs Brown's maiden sister, gush
ing lady in corkserew curls, who led. the
revels, whether I also would not indulge them
‘by repeating some sweet stanzas." No one

nore ready than I. Without a moment's
hesitation, 1 stood forth, and in aloud voice I

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON

began one of ny favourite passages from Blais
“Gave

 

ating othe kron Wa of Nohng

‘Whore st they ringthon might he debaahee

“Thank you, der, that will do nicely 1”
‘terrupted the lady with the curls. * But that's
only ‘the beginning of its” 1 eral. “Yes,
ear, but that wil quite do! We won't ask
‘you to repeat any more of i," and I withdrew
to the borders of the company in bevider‘ment. Nor did the Browns oF their visitors
cer lear what it was the debauchee might
have sid of done in mote favourable circum
stances,

‘The growing eagemess which T displayed
forthe society of selected schoolfllows and
for such gentle disipations as were within my
reach exercised my Father greatly, His fey
rushed forward with the pace of steam
engine, and saw me the life and soul of a
‘gambling club, or daunting it at the Mabille.
Hee bad no confidence in the action of moder
ating powers, and he was fond of repeating
‘hat the downward path iseasy. If one fretted
to be bathingwith ones companions on the
shingle, and’ preferred this exercise to. the

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘study of God's Word, it was 's symbol of «
terrible decline, the angle of which would
_grow steeper and steper tll one plunged into
perdition, He was, himself, timid and relisive, and he shrank from all svoidable
companionship with others, except on the
footing of a master and teacher. My step
mother and I, who neither taught nor ruled,
‘yeamed for looser chxin nd lighter relation
Ships. With regard to myself, my Father
bout this time hit-on @ plan from which he
Ihoped much, but from which little resulted
He looked to Geonge to supply what my
temperament seemed to require of congenial
Jjuveile companionship.

TET have not mentioned “George” until
now, it not that he was a new acquaintance.
When we first came down into the country,
cour sympathy had been called forth by an
evident to «litle boy, who was knocked over
bby a hone, and whose thigh was broken,
Somebody (L suppose Mary Grace, since my
Father could racely bring himself to pay these

ublic visits) went to seo the child in the
Infirmary, and accidentally discovered that he
‘was exacly the sane age that 1 was. This,
find the fact that he was a meditative and
Sober little boy, attracted us all still further

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘to George, who became converted under one
cof my Father's sermons. He attended my
ppublie baptism, end was so much moved by
this ceremony thnt he passionately desired to
te baptized also, and was infact so immersed,
few months late, slightly to my chagrin,
‘ince I thereupon ceased to be the only infant
prodigy in communion. When see were both
‘nour thirteenth yen, George boeame an out
‘door servant tous, and did od jobs under the
iardener. My -Father, finding him, as he
‘suid, “docile, obedient and engeging,” petted
George 8 good deal, and tanght him a litle
otany. He called’ George, by curious
contortion of thought, my "spiritual foster
Drother,” and antiipated for him, 1 think,
‘caret, like mine, in the Ministry.

(Our garden suffered from an incursion of
slugs, which laid the verbenas inthe dust, and
shore off the camations st if with pry of
scissors, To cope with this plague we invested
in a drake ands duck, who wete christened
Philemon and Boueix. Every night large
ceabluye-laves, containing the lees of beer
‘were spread about the flower-beds as traps,
tnd dawn these had become green parlouts
‘rammed with intoxicated slags. One of
‘Georges enlist morning duties was to tree
FATHER AND SON
Philemon and Baucis trom thei coop, and,
armed with small wand, gle thet oot
eps to the flat in one cablngeleat eer
nother My Father tasd to watch this
Performance from an upper window, an, in
Inoments of high fctinussey, he wan wont
to parody the poct Gray:

ew fe Sth Gangs diss eum 1

‘This is all, or almost all, thet T remember
bout George's occupations, but he was singulaely blameless.

‘My Fathers plan now was that I should
form ean Inbency wih Googe se boy
of ty ow age, of uy ome ite of my Gu
futare. Mp sipmctier sil in. bondage
to the soil conventions, was pmaoatly
Houbled st thin and ged th’ bane of
ihoitteaces” My Yather replied that
ch Intimacy would Kes tne “lowly
Sia that fom so good « boy «1 George L
(ould ew nothing undsate.* He wil
outage hie ott wie bots when he
omer tito the howe sid my stepmother,
foal my Father sighed to think how narrow
the horn of Wma view of nrealy
th

Tnthis cpr, fF mny call 0, think

 
FATHER AND SON
that my Father had before im the fine repub:
Tican example of Sandford and Merton,” some
arts of which book he admired extremely.
Accordingly George and T were sent out &0
take walks together, and as we started, my
Father, with an air of great benevolence,
‘would suggest some passage of Seripture,
aspect of God's bountiful scheme i
‘on which you may profitably meditate
together.” George and 1 never pursued the
discussion of the text with whieh my Father
started us for more than a minute oF two;
then we fell into silence, or investigated
‘current scenes and rustie topes.

‘As is natural among the eildren of the poor,
George was precocious where I was infantile,
and undeveloped where Iwas elaborate, Our

inds could hardly find a point st which to
touch, He gave me, however, under efos‘examination, interesting’ hints about rural
matters, and I Hiked him, although 1 felt his
‘company to be insipid, Sometimes he earied
my books by my side to the larger and more
distant school which I now attended, but [was
always in a fever of dread lest my sehookfellows should see him, and should aeeuse me
‘of having to be “brought” to school. ‘To
‘expliin to thom that the companionship of

  

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
this wholesome and rather blunt young peasant
‘vas part of my spistual discipline would have
Teen all beyond my powers

Twas soon after this that my’ stepmother
made her one vain effort to break through the
stillness of our lives My Father's energy
seemed to decline, to become more fitful, 0
take unseasonuble diteetions, My mother
instinctively felt that his peculisities were
‘growing upon him; he would searcely stir
from his microscope, except to go to. the
chapel, and he was visible to fewer and fewer
visitor, She bad taken a. pleasure in his
literary eminence, and she was aware that this
too, would slp fom him ; that, so persistenty
pt out of sight, he must soon be out of
mind. T know not how she gathered courage
for her tremendous effort, but she tok me, 1
collet, into her counsels. We were to unite
to oblige my Father to start to his feet and
face the world. Alas! we might as well have
attempted to rouse the summit of Yes Tor
into yoleanie action, ‘To my mother’s aigutents, my Father—with that bafling smile of
his—replied: “I esteem thereprosch of Christ
greater riches than the treasures of Egypt!”
find that this answer was indirect made it none
the less conclusive. My mother wished him

“0 7

 

 

 

 
 

FATHER AND SON
to give lectures, to go to London, to read
‘papers before the Royal Society, to enter into
controversy with foreign saoande, to condict
lases of out-door zoology at fashionable
‘watering-plnces. T held my breath with ad‘miration as she poured forth her scheme, so
daring, so brilliant, so sure to cover our great
‘man with glory. He listened to her with a,
smbiguous smile, and shook his head st as,
‘and resumed the reading of his Bible,

"AL the date at which I write these pages,
the arts of illustration are so. universally
fone that it i dificult to realise the dav
nes in which a remote English village was
plunged alfa century ago. » No opportunity
‘was offred to us dwellers in remote places of
realising the outward appearances of unfamiliar
persons, seenes or things. Although ours was
perhaps the most cultivated household in the
pavish, I ind never seen so much as. repreentation of x work of sculpture tll T was
thirteen. My mother then received from her
‘eirler home certain volumes, among which
‘was # gaudy gift-book of some kind, contain
ing afew steel engravings of statues,

"These attrcted me violently, and here for
‘the first time 1 gazed on Apotlo with his proud
‘gesture, Venus in her undulations the kirtled

 
FATHER AND SON
shape of Diana, and Jupiter yolominously
Dbearded. Very litte informatio, and that to
‘me not intelligible, was given in the text, but
‘these were said to be figures of the old Greek
gods. asked my Father to tll mesbout these
old Greck gods." His answer was direct and
disconcerting. He suid_—how 1 recollect the
place and time enrly in the morning, as I stood
Deside the window in our gussh brett
room—he aiid that the so-called gods of the
Greeks were the shadows east by the vices of
the heathen, and reflected their infamous lives
‘it was for such things as these that God
poured down brimstone and fire onthe Cities
of the Plan, and there is nothing in the
legends of these gods or rather devils, that it
is not better for a Christian not to know.
His face blazed white with Puritan fury as he
Sid this—I see him now in my mind’ eye,
in his violent emotion. You might have
thought that he had himself exeaped with
horror from some Hellenic hippodeomne.

My Father's prestige was by this time eon.
siderably lessened in my mind, and though T
loved and admired him, I had now long cesed
‘to hold him infllible. T did not accept his
‘ondernation ofthe Greeks, although I bowed
twit. In private T retumed to examine my

=

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
steel engravings of the statues, and I reflected
that they were too beautiful to be so wicked as
‘my Father thought they were. ‘The dangerous
fd pagan notion that beauty paliates ev
Tbudded in my: mind, without any extemal
suggestion, and by this efletion alone Twas
still further sondered from the sith in whieh
Thad been trained. I gathered very diligently
all Tcoold pick up about the Greek gods and
‘heir stats; was not mu it was indeed
ludicrously Hite and false, but it was germ.
‘And at this esthetic juncture 1 was drawn
into what was relly father an extraordinary
Gree of incidents,

‘Among the “Saints” in our
lived a shoemsker and his wife, who I
uoghter, Susan Flood. She’ was « flighty,
‘excited young creature, and Intely, during the
[pessige of some itinerary revivalists, she had
been converted "in the oisist way, with
sobs, gespe and gurglings. When this ersis
passed, she came with her parents to our
‘meetings, and was reeived quietly enough to
the breaking of bread. But about the ime T
Sepa ener

visit town unconverted tele and sunt.

WTons Gest wnpered amonget us and then

‘openly stated, thit these relatives hd taken
Ey

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
tet to the Crystal Plie whee in
Arough the Sculpture Gay, Sos cone
sf damncy bad bet So gsr aftonta
that she had sated the aks igus ith
the and of her parol, before ber boi
somatios could sop het.” She a in ck
on sol aon the statury and ed to the
Intenso hagin of er ncle and unt very
worthy anon, bee seed and. bought
Telos saga, who det her wit «
arming to er relations tat se bad beter
te nett home to Devontire end looked
thet" "San Floods rn tem bower
tr tmp; she bed no sen of ving
{ete injulctoly or unbecoming she wae
teady to recount to. very ene rague snd
ciel lnngeage, ow shed been thle to
Tey for the Lod in the very temple of
Dall” for so she postal decibel he
Ceysal Palace, Shera, ofcourse in tate
oF unbridled bystra, but such physi ex
natios were not encoorged Kong
Eo the ev of Susan cod awaken n great
Atal of sympathy.

“Thee war eld meeting of the eles
cu rowing oom to dics ant onteved
tobe preset though stot oberon. My
atic while be renie th purty of Susi

‘ot

 

 
FATHER AND SON
lood's zeal, questionedits wisdom. He noted
‘ut the statuary was not her property, but
that ofthe Crystal Palace, Of the other com‘munieants, none, think, had the very slightest
notion what the objects were that Susan had
‘taashed, of tied to smash, and frankly maintained that they thought her condiact magicent. As for me, I had gathered by persistent

iniry enough information to know that what
hher sterllegious parasol had attacked were
bodies of my mysterious friends, the Greek
gods, and ial the rest of the village applied
feonoclastic Susan, It lest would be ardent
fon the other side.

‘But T was conscious that there was nobody
Jn the world to whom I could go for sympathy,
Te T had ever read “Hellas” 1 should have
murmured

Apel P and Love,

‘Aad even Olympian at

Grew we, wh lg oa ll om them.
‘On the day in question, Iwas unable to endure
the drawing-room meeting to its close, but,
clutching my volume of the Funereal Poets,
Timadea dash forthe garden. Inthe midst of
8 tnass of laurels,» clenting had been made,
where fers were grown and a garden-sat was
placed. ‘There was no regular path to this
en

 

 
FATHER AND SON
ssylum ; one dived under thesnakerlike boughs
Of the laurel and eame up again in absolute
seclusion.

Thto this haunt I now fled to meditate about
the sivage godliness of that vandal, Susan
Flood. So extremely ignorant ws Ith I supposed ler to have destroyed the originals of the
atues, marble and unique. 1 knew nothing
shout plaster easts, end I thought the damage
{it i posible that there had really been no
Alamage whatever) was ofan iereparable charac
ter, sank into theseat, with the great wall of
lnurels whispering around me, and I burst into
tears. There was something, surely, quaint
and pathetioin th figure ofa ttle Plymouth
Brother sitting in that advanced year of grace,
‘weeping bitterly for indignities done to
Herines and to Aphrodite. Then I opened
my book for consolation, and read a great
block of pompous vere out of “The Deity,”
in the midst of which exercise, yielding to
the softness of the hot and aromatie at, Fell
fast asleep.

“Among those who applauded the zeal of
‘Susan Flood’s parasol, the Pages were pro:
tminent. These were a retired Baptist minisAer and. his wife, from Exmouth, who hd
lately settled amongst us, and joined in the

 
 

PATHER AND SON
Iresking of bread. Mr. Paget was a fit old
‘man, whose round pale face was lear-shaven,
snd who carried fall crop of loose white bait
above it; his lange lips were always moving,
whether he spoke or not. He resembled, as 1
‘ow perceive, the portraits of S. . Colevidge
in age, but with all the intellect left out of
them. He lived in a sort of trance of solemn
religious despondeney.  Hehad throwa up his
cure af souls, beeause he became convinced
that he bad committed the Sin aguinst the Helly
Ghost. “His wife was younger than he, very
small very tight, very active, with black eyes
like pin-prcks at the base of an extremely
high and narrow forehead, bordered with glosy
ringlets. He was very cross to her, and it was
‘murmured that “dear Mra. Paget had often
Ihad to pass through the waters of afltion.”

In our cirle, it was never for a moment

Sid that he had grvely sinned, and was

 
FATHER AND SON
the Smiling Face might be drawn forth for
him from behind the Frowning Providence.
‘When the man had an epileptic seinire in the
‘High Stret, he was not taken to a hospital,
but we repeated to one another, with shaken
heads, that Stan, thet erookid Serpent, had
‘been unloosed for a season. Me. Paget was
fon of talking in private nnd in publi, of his
Arenal spiritual condition, and he would drop
his voice while he spoke of having committed
the Unpardonable Sin with «sort of shudder.
ing exultation, such as people sometimes feel
in the possesion ofa very unusual disease

Te might be thonght that the postion held
in any community by persons so aficted nd
cccentrie as the Pagets would be very prefatious. But it was not s0 with us; on the
tontraty, they took a prominent place at once
Mr. Paget, in spite of his spiritual banke
ruptey, was only too anxious to help my
Father in his ministrtions, and used to beg to
Ye allowed to pray and exhort. In the latter
ease he took the tone of a wounded veteran,
‘who, though fallen on the bloody ld himself
ould still encourage younger warriors to
arel forward to vietory. Everybody longed
to know what the exact nature had been of
that sin aguinst the Holy Ghost which bad

 
FATHER AND SON
deprived Me. Paget of every glimmer of hope
for time or for eternity. Tt was whispered
that even my Father himself was not precisely
‘scquainted with the character of it

"This mysterious disability clothed Me. Paget
for us with a kind of romance. We watched
him as the women watched Dante in Veron,

TE aan ee ee

Has ee i iad singed etek
is person lacked, ti true, something of the
dignity of Dante’, for it was his eaprice to
wale ip and down the High Steet st noonday
with one of those eascades of coloured paper
‘hich were known as“ ornaments for you freplice” slung over the back and another over
the front of his body. ‘hese he manufactured
for sle, ad he adopted the quaint pretice of
wearing the exuberant objects as w means for
thee advertisement.

Mrs. Paget lhud been accustomed to rale
inthe little ministry from which Mr. Paget's
clebrated Sin had banished them and she was
inclined to clutch at theseeptrenow. She was
the only person Tever met with who wss not
afiid of the dlsplessure of my Father. She
would fx her viper-oloured eyes on his, and
‘ay with a kind of gimlet firmness, hardly

 

 

 

 

 

  
FATHER AND SON
hk that isthe trv iteration, Brother
Gor," But let us tum to Colossians,
etc, Geass
matter.” She fascinated my Father, who was
rot accustomed to this kind of interruption,
‘and as she was not to be softened by any
flattery (such as" Marvellous indeed, Sister,
is your acqutintance with the means of
frace!") she become almost a terror to him,
She abused her powers by taking great
iberties, which culminated inher drawing his
sttention to the fact that my poor stepmother
Aisplayed “un overweening love of dress” ‘The
scousation was perfectly fase ; my stepmother
‘was if rather vichly, always plainly dressed, in
theSober Quaker modes almost her only ora
‘ment was a lange carnelian brooeh, set in
floweredflat gold. To this the envenomed Paget
drew my Father's attention as“ ikely to lead
“the litle ones of the flock into temptation.”
My poor Father felt it his duty, thus diretly
rudmonished, tospeak to my mother. “Doyou
not think, my Love, that you should, sone who
sets an example to other, dined the weating
ofthat gaudy brooch?” “One must fasten one's
collar with something, I suppose?” « Well,
but how does Sister Paget fasten her ella
“Sister Paget,” replied my Mother, stung

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON

atlas into rejoinder, * fastens her collar with
4 piny—and that is « thing which I would
‘ther die than do”

Nor did I eseape the attentions ofthis ealous
reformer. Mn. Paget was good enodgh to
take a great interest in me, and she was not
satisfied with the way in which T was being
brought up. Her presence semed to pervade
the village, and T could neither come in nor
{go out without seeing herhard bonnet and her
‘pursed-uplips. She would hasten to report to
my Father that she sow me Iaghing and
talking “with a lot of unconverted. boss;
these being the companions with whom Thad
full permission to bathe and boat. She urged
‘my Father to complete my holy’ voeation by
some definite step, by which he would dediate
ime completely tothe Lord’ service. Further
Schooling she thought: needless, und merely
likely to foster intllestoal pride
she remarked, had troubled very i
youth about worldly knowledge, and yet how
blesed he had been in the conversion of
souls until he had incurred the displeasure
of the Holy Ghost!

11 do not know exactly what she wanted
my Father to-do. with mes perhaps she
id not know herself; she was meddlesome,

 

 
FATHER AND SON
ignorant and fanatical, and she liked to faney
tit she was exercising influence. But the
‘wonderful, the inexplicable thing is that my
Father.—who, with all his Hmitations, was
so distinguished and high-winded,—should
listen to her for a moment, and still more
wonderful is it that he really allowed her,
frim vixen that she was to disturb his plans
and retard his purposes. T think the explanation layin the perfectly login! position
she took up. My’ Father found himself
Trough face to face at last, not with a disfiple, but with a trained expert in
‘own peculiar scheme of religion. At every.
point she was armed with arguments. the
Source of which he knew and the validity of
‘which he recognised. He trembled before
‘Mrs, Paget as # man in dream may tremble
before ® parody of his own central self,
and he could not blame her without laying
himself open somewhere to censure.

‘But my stepmothers instinets were more
primitive and her actions less wite-drawn tha
ty Father's She disiked Mrs. Paget as much
‘sone earnest believer ean bring herself to dislike a sister in the Lord. My stepmother had
‘quietly devoted herself to what she thought the
Dest way of bringing me up, and she did not

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
propose now to be thwarted by the wife of =
Tunatie Baptist. AL this time 1 was amixture
of childishness and prigyisiness, of eurious
knowledge and dense ignorance. Certain portons of my intellect were growing with wn
‘wholesome activity, while others were stunted,
‘rhad never stirred at all, Twas ikea panto
which a pot hus been placed, with the effet
that the centre iservshed snd arrested, while
shoots are straggling up to the light om all
Sides. My Father himself was aware of this,
tnd in a spasmodic way he wished to regulate
iy thoughts, But all he did was to try to
straighten the shoots, without removing the
pot which kept them resolutely down.

was my mother who decided that T was
row eld enough to go to boarding school,
fand my Father, beving discovered that an
elderly couple of Plymouth Brethren kept an
“academy for young gentlemen” in a neighbouring seaport town,-—in the prospectus of
‘which the Knowledge and love of the Lord
‘were mentioned as occupying the attention of
the head-master and his assistants fr more
closely than any mere considerations of worldly
‘uition,—was persunded to entrust me to its
fare. "He stipulated, however, that T should
‘always come home from Saturday night to

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘Monday morning, not, as he sai, that T might
receive any earnal indulgence, but that there
‘ight be no cessation of my communion as &
believer with the Saints in our village on
Sundays. To this school, therefore, I presently
departed, gaveky and homesick, and the sift
Detween my soul and that of my Father
widened a litle more.
CHAPTER Xt

Larue boys from quiet, pious households,
commonly found, in those days, chasm yavrning atthe fect of their inexperience when they
arrived at Boarding school. But the fact that
Tail slept at home on Saturday and Sunday
nights preserved me, Ifaney, from many surprises. There was ris, but it was broad
find slow for me. On the other hand, for ray
Father I am inclined to think Uhat it was
definite and. sharp. Permission for me to
desert the parental hearth, even for five days
{in certain weeks, was tantamount in bis mind,
to admitting that the great scheme, so long
caressed, so pusionately fostered, must in its
primitive bigness be now dropped,

The Great Scheme (L cannot resist giving
it the mortuary honour of capital letters) had
been, as my readers know, that T should be
exclusively and conmieeutively dedicated,
through the whole of my lif, to the manifest

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON

snd uninterrupted and uncompromised “ser.
Vice of the Lord” ‘That had been the 15pimtion of my Mother, and at her death she
hhad boqueathed that deste tomy Father,
like a dream of the Promised Land. In
their eestasy, my parents had taken me, as

 

Hosts in Shiloh, ‘They had git me about with
‘linen ephod, and hd hoped to leave me
there; “as long as he liveth,” they hd said,
“he shall be ent onto the Lord

Doithtles in the course of these fourteen
yu it had oceasionelly lashed upon my
Father, ashe overheard somespeech of ine, oF
Aetected some idisynersy, that I was not One
‘of those whose temperament points them out
as ultimately fitted for an austere life of reTigion. What he hoped, however, was Ut
‘when the litte roughnesses of childhood were
rubbed away, there would pass a deep mellowness over my soul. He had s touching
‘way of condoning my fnuts of conduct directly
after reproving them, and he would softly depreeate my frailty, saying, in atone of hurrowing tenderness, * Are you not the child of many
prayers” He continued to think thst prayer,

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘sh passionate importunate prayer as his, must
preva, Faith could move mountains; should
FE not be able to mould the litle ductile heart
‘of a child, since he was sure that bis own faith
‘vas unfalering ? Hl had yearned and waited
fora son who should be totaly without huroan,
faudacities, who should be humble, pure, not
troubled by worldly agitations, x son whose
lie should be cleansed and straightened fom,
bore, in custodiendo sermones Dei i whom
‘everything should be suerficed exeept the one
thing needfal to salvation.

How such s marvel of lowly pity was to
umn a living had never, I think, cceurred to
him. "My Father was singularly indifferent
bout money. Perhaps his notion was that,
{totally devoid of ambitions as T-wss to be, 1
should quietly become adult, and continue his
‘ministations among the poor of the Christian
flock. He had some dim dream, 1 think, of
there being just enough for us all without my
having to take up any business or trade. 1
believe it was immediately after my fist term
‘at boarding-sehool, that Twas a silent but indignant witness of s conversation between my
Father and Mr. ‘Thomas Brightwen, my stepmothers brother, who was » banker in one of
the Easteen Counties.

0

 
FATHER AND SON

‘This question “what is he to bet” in a
‘worldly sense, was being discussed, and Tam
sre that it was for the fist time, at all events
in my presence. Mr. Brigitwen, I faney,
Jnsd been worked upon by my stepmother,
whose affection for me was always on the
Increase, to suggest, or faintly to stir the al
fn the neighbourhood of suggesting, » query
bout my future. He was eildless and so
‘was she, and T think a kind impulse led
them to’ feel the way,” as itis ealled, 1
believe he sid thet the banking business,
wisely and honoursbly conducted, sometimes
Ted, as we know that it is apt to lend, to
fluence, To my horror, my Father, with
rising emphasis, replied that “if there were
offered to his beloved ebild what is ealled “an
‘opening” that would Iead to an income of
£10,000 year, and that would divert his
thoughts and interest fom the Lord's work,
the would reject it on his chid’s behult” Mr.
rightwen, a precise and polished gentleman,
who evidently never made an exaggerated
statement in his life, was, 1 think, funtly
feandaised; he soon left us, and T do not
recollect his paying usa second visit.

‘For my silent part, T felt very much like
Gehuzi, and T would fain have followed alter

   

 
FATHER AND SON
the banker if T had dared to do. 30, into
the night. T would have exeused to him the
ardour of my Elisha, and 1 would have
reminded him of the sons of the prophets—
“Give me, I pray thes,” 1 would have said,
“a talent of silver and two changes of gu
ments” It seemed to me very hard that my
Father should dispose of my” possibilities of
wealth in so summary « fishion, but the fact
that I did resent it, and regretted what 1
supposed to be my *‘chanee,” shows how fur
fapart we had alrendy sorung. My Father, 1
‘am convinced, thought that he gave words to
my inward instinets when he repudiated the
‘ery mild and inconclusive benevolence of his
Ibotherin-ln, But he certainly did not do
so, Twas conscious ofa sharp and instinetive
had, as T fancied,
‘wealth so nese my grasp, and at secing i all
frst violently into the sea of my Father's
seruples
Not one of my village fiends attended the
Doarding-school to which I was now attached,
snd I arrived there without an acquaintance,
T should soon, however, have found a comer
‘of my own if my Father hed not unluckily
stipulated that Twas not to sleep in the dori
tory with boys of my own age, but in the oom,

 

  

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON

cceupied by the two elder sons of prominent
Plymouth Brother whom he knew. From a
social point of view, this was an unfortunate
arrangement, since these youths were some
Years older and many years riper than T; the
lest, in fvct, was soon to leaves they hd
‘enjoyed their independence, and they now
sgreatly resented being saddled with the presence of an unknown rein, The s
sition had been. that they would protect
tnd foster my religious practices; would encourage me, indeed, as my Father put it, to
approach the ‘Throne of Grace with them
at morning and evening prayer. ‘They made
no pretence, however, to be considered godly;
they looked upon me as an intruder? and
after a while the younger, and ruder, of them
‘openly let me know that they believed I had
‘been put into thelr room to “spy upon” them :
it had been a plot, they knew, between their
father and mine: and he darkly warmed me
that I should sufler if anything got out” T
hind, however, no wish to trouble them, nor
‘any fant interest in their alfuirs. 1 soon dis
avered that they were ubsorbed ina silly kind
‘of amorous correspondence with the girl of
‘neighbouring seademy, but “what were all
sue toys to me?”

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON

‘These young fellows, who ought long before
tw have left the schoo, did nothing overtly un
kind to me, but they condemned me to silence.
‘They ceased to address me except with an
ceasional command. By reason of my youth,
Twas in bed and asleep before my companions
acrived upstairs, and in the morning T was
always routed up and packed about my business while they ail were drowsing. But the
fact that Thad been eat off from my eoevals
by night, ext me off from them also by day—
sothatf was nothing to them, neither aboneder
nor a day-stholar, neither flesh, sh por
fowl ‘The loneliness of my life was extreme,
and that I always went home on Saturday
sfternoon and returned on Monday morning
Stil further checked -my companionship. at
School. For along time, round the outskirts
ofthat busy throng of opening lives, I wan
dered lonely as a cloud,” and sometimes 1 was
nore unhappy than I had ever been before
Noone, however, bullied me, and though Iwas
dimly and indefinably witness to acts of unsleanmess and eructy, Tyas the vitim of no
‘such acts and the recipient of no dangerous confidences I suppose that my qucer reputation
for sanctity, half dreadful, half ridiculous, sur‘rounded me with a non-conducting atmosphere.

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Weare the victims of hallowed proverbs,
‘and one of the most classic of these tells us
that “the child ip father of the man." But
in my ease I cannot think that this was true.
Tn mature years T have always been grefgtious, a lover of my kind, dependent upon
the company of ftiends for the very pulse of
‘moral life. "Tobe marooned, to be shut up
ina solitary cell, to inhabit a lighthouse, oF
‘camp alone in forest, these have always
secmied to me allictions too heavy to be borne,
even in imagination. A. state in whieh con.
verstion exists not is for me an air too empty
of oxygen for my lungs to breathe
Yet when Took back upon my days st boarding school, Lsce myself unatiracted by any of
the human beings sround me. My grown-up,
‘years are made luminous to me in memory by
the ardent faces of my friends, but T ci
scarce reeall so much as the names of more
than two or three of my  schoolellows,
‘There is not one of them’ whote mind or
‘whose character made any lasting impression
upon me. In later life, I have been im‘ltient of solitude, and afraid of it at school,
Tasked for no more than to slip out of the
Ihunly-burly and be alone with my refleetio
‘and my fancies. That magnetism of humanity

 

 
FATHER AND SON
which has been the agony of mature years, of
this Thad not a trie when T'was a boy. Of
those tragle loves to which most men look
‘buck with tendemess and passion, emotions to
bbe explained only ss Montaigne explained
them, “pareaque etait hi, parcoque était
nai” Tew nothing. 1,to whom fendship
Ins’ since been Uke sunlight and like sleep,
left school unbrightened and unrefreshed by
commerce with a single friend.

ICT had been clever, T should doubtless
Inave attracted the jealousy of my fellows, but
wus spared thie by the mediocrity of my
sucoess in the clases, One little fact I may
mention, beeause it exemplifies the advance in
observation which has been made in forty
yeurs. I was extremely nearsighted and in
feonsoquence was placed at a gross dis
advantage, by being unable to see the slate or
the black-board on which our tasks were ex
plkined, Tt seems almost incredible, when
fnerelleets upon it, but during the whole of
ry schoo! life, this fact was never commented
‘upon or taken into account by a single person,
until the Polish lady who taught us the ele‘ments of German and French drew some one's

toitin my sixteenth year. T was
Tout I passed for being denser thea,

 

  
FATHER AND SON
1 was because of the myopie haze that en
veloped me. But tis is not an autobiography,
and with the cold and shrouded details of my
‘uninteresting school lie T will ot fatigue the
reader

Twas not content, however, tobe the cipher
that T found myself, and when 1 had been at
school for about a year, [broke out,” greatly,
T think, to my own surprise, in» popular ac.
We had a young usher whom we disliked. 1
suppose, poor balestarved phthise la, that he
‘was the most miserable of as all. He was, T
think, united for the task which had been
forced pon him; he was fretful, unsympethetic, agitated "The school-house, wn old ram
bling place, possessed a long eellarlike room
tu opened from our general corridor and was
lighted by deep windows, carefully barred,
‘hich looked into an inner garden. ‘This vault
was devoted to us and to our play-boxes: by’
‘tact law, no master entered it. Oneevening,
Just at dusk, great numberof ws were here
‘when the bell for night-school rang, snd many
of us dawaled at the summons. Mr. B.,
tuetless in his anger, busted in among us,
scolding ina shrill voice, and proceeded to
vive us forth, was the latest to emenge,
tnd ashe turned nway toseeifany other truant

 

 

  
PATHER AND SON
‘might not be hiding, I determined upon action,
With quick movement, T drew the dooe
bichind me and bolted it, just in time to hear
the imprisoned usher seream with vexation.
We boys all trooped upstairs, and itis ehasaeteristic of my isolation that T had not one
“chia” to whom T eould confide my feat,
‘That Me. Be had been shut in. beeame,
however, almost instantly known, and the
nightelas, usually so unruly, was awed by the
event into exemplary decorum. There, with
‘no master near us, ina silence rarely broken
by a giggle or a eat-all, we sat diligently
workings or pretending towork. ‘Through my
Innin, 8 T hung over my book, thousand new
‘thoughts began to surge. T was the liberator,
the tyrannicide; Thad freed all my fellows
from the adious oppressor. Surely, when they
learned that it was 1, they would cluster round
‘me ; surely, now 1 should be somebody in the
Sschool-life, no longer a mere trotting shadowe
or invisible presence, ‘The interval seemed
Jong: at length Mr, B. was released. by a
servant, and he came up into the school-room
to find us in Uhit ominous condition of sus

 

pense
"At first he std nothing. He. sank upon
‘9 chi inn halffuinting attitude, while
FATHER AND SON
he prested his hand to his side his stress
and silence redoubled the boys’ surprise, and
filled me with something lke remorse. | For
‘the first time, I reflested that he was human,
that perhaps he suffered, He rose presently
and took slate, upon which he wrote two
questions: “Did you do itt” “Do. you
Know who did 1” and these he propounded to
‘ach boy in rotation, The prompt, redoubled
“No” in every ease seemed to pile up his
despair

‘One ofthe last to whom he hel, in silence,
the tembling slate was the perpetrator, As T
‘suw the moment spproach, an unspeskable
timidity swept over me. I reflected thet no
fone hd seen me, thit no one could accuse
me. Nothing could be easier or safer than
to deny, nothing more perplexing to. the
‘enemy, nothing less perilous for the culprit.
‘A flood of plausible remsons invaded my brain:
T soemed to sce this to be # case in which to
tall the tuth would be not merely foolish, it
would be wrong. Yet when the usher stood
Hoefore me, holding the slate out in his white
snd shaking band, I seized the pencil, and, igtoring the first question, 1 wrote = Yes" firmly
against. the second. "I suppose that the
fumbiguity ofthis setion pusaled Mr, B. He

 

 

 

  

 
FATHER AND SON
pressed me to answer: “Did you doit” butto
that I wasobstinately dumb and avay T was
hhurtied to an empty bed-room, where for the
whole of thit night and the next day vas
Iheld a prisoner, visited at intervals by the
hhead-master and other inquisitorial persons,

LT was gradually persuaded to make a full
confession and apology.

"This absurd litle incident had one effect,
it revealed me to my sehoolfellows as an ex
fstence, From thet time forth T lay no longer
under the stigma of invisibility; 1 had proAdvced my material shape and had thrown ay
shadow for moment into a Iegend. But,
other respects, things went on much as before:
curiounly unindluenced by my surroundings, 1
in my ten failed to exercise fnlaence nd my
practical isolation was no les than it had been
hefore. Tt was thus that it came about that

social memories of my bourdng-sehool life
‘are monotonous and vague. Tt was a period
daring which, as it appears to me now on look=
Ing back, the stream of my spintval nature
spreed out into shallow. pool which was al=
most stagnant, was labouring to gain those
clements of conventional knowledge, which
Id, in many eases, up to that time been si
‘gully lacking. But my besin was starved,

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
nd my intellectual peroeptons were veiled
Elder persons who jn later years would speak
‘to me frankly of my schooldays assured me
‘that, while Thad often struck them as asmart
fand quaint and even interesting child, all
‘promise seemed to fide out of me as shoo
boy, and that those who were most inclined to
be indulgent gave up the hope thst I should
prove aman in way remarkable. ‘This was
particularly the ease with the most indulgent
‘of my protectors, my refined and gentle stepmother

“As this record ean, however, have no value
that is not based on its rigorous adhesion to
‘the truth, Tam bound to say that the drearness und sterility of my school-lfe were more
Apparent than real. Iwas pursbing certain
lines of moral and mental development all the
time, and since my sehoolmastery and my
Schoolfellows combined in thinking meso dull
Twill display a tardy touch of «proper spirit”
and ask whetherit may not party have been be‘eau they were themselves so commonplace
T think that i some drops of sympathy, that
Imagie dew of Paradise, had fallen upon my
desert, it might have blossomed like the rose,
frat all event, ike that chimerical ower, the
Rose of Jericho. As it was, the convention
 
 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
ty around me, the intlletaal drought, gave
tne no opportunity of outward growth. ‘They

id not destroy, but they cooped up, and rendered slow and inefficient, that internal ie
‘which continued, as T have said, to live on
tunscen. "This took the form of dreams and
speculations, in the course of which T went
through many tortuous process of the

ind, the actual sims of which were fail,
although the movements themselves. were
fseful, Tf T may more minutely define my
meaning, T would say that in my school
days, without possessing thoughts, I yet pre
‘pated my mind for thinking, and learned how
to think:

‘The great subject of my curiosity at this
‘time was words, a instruments of expression,
Twas incesant in adding to my vooabul
‘and in finding accurate and individual terms
for things. Here, too, the exercise preceded
the employment, since I was busy providing
riyself with words before T had any ideas to
express with them. When T read Shakefpeare and entne spon the passage in which
Prospero tells Calitun thst head no thoughts

I is toaster taught him words, Temember
starting with amazement at the poet's intultion, for such s Caliban had 1 been :

 

 

 

   

 

 
FATHER AND SON
1 pled ther,

‘oak al to ke the pe eight tte each Bor

‘One hing ten whom Cen tnt ge

ew tne oom meaning, bot walt gay ke

‘Wik words hat made them ow

 

 

For my Prosperos I sought vaguely in such
hooks as Thad access to, and Twas eonscions
that as the inevitable word seized hold of me,
with it out of the darkness into strong light
fame the image andthe ie,

My Father possessed a. copy of Bailey's
“Btymologigil Dictionary,” a book published
cual in the eighteenth century. Over this T
‘would pore for hours, playing with the words
in fishion which T ean no longer reconstruct,
snd delighting in the savour of the rich, old
fashioned country phrases. My Father nding
me thus employed, fell to wondering et the
nature of my pursuit, and T could offer him,
Indeed, no very intelligible explanation of it.
Hie urged me to give up such idleness, and to
rake practical use of language. For this
purpose he conceived an exercise which he
‘obliged me to adopt, although it was hateful
tome, He sent me forth, it might be, up the
lane to Warbury Hill and round home by the
copses; or else down one chine tothe set and

30
FATHER AND SON
along the shingle to the next cutting in the
cliff, and so buck by way ofthe village: and
the desired me to put down, in language as fll

that Thad Seen in each exeurSion. As [have sai, tis practice wns dete
table and irksome to me, but, as I lok back,
Tam inclined to believe it to have been the
most salutary, the most practical piece of
training which my Father ever gave me It
forced me to observe sharply and clearly to
form visual impressions, to retain them in the
‘brain, and to clothe them in punetilions and
courte language:

Twas in my fiteenth year that T became
again, this time intlligently, acquainted with
Shakespeare. T got hold of single play,
‘The Tempest, in « school edition, prepared, 1
‘suppose, for one ofthe university examinations
which were then being instituted in the provinces. This [read through and through, not
disdaining the help ofthe notes, and revelling
in the glossary. I studied The Tompest as 1
had hitherto studied no cassie work, and it
filled my whole being with music and romance
‘This book was my evn hoarded possessor
the rest of Shakespeare's works were beyond
my hopes. But gradually T contrived to
borrow a volume Here and a volume there. 1

 

 

 

 

 

   
FATHER AND SON
completed The Merchant of Venice, read
Cymbeline, Filius Cesar and Much Ado:
‘most of the others, I think, remained closed
to me for a long time. But these were
‘enough to steep my horizon with all the
colours of sunrise. Tt was due, no doubt, to
ry bringing up, thatthe plays never appealed
to'me as hounded by the exigencies of stage
‘or played by actors. The images they rived
{in my mind were of real people moving in the
ne Sak on te metal pla
life, sentiments that were clothed in the most
lovely, and yet, as it seemed to me, the most
‘obvious and the most inevitable language

TE was while Iwas thus under the fall spell
of the Shakespearean neeromancy that a signiffcent event occurred. My Father took me
tup to London for the frst time since my
infancy. Our visit-was one of few days
‘only, snd its purpose was that we might tke
part in some enormous Evangelical conference.
We stayed in a dark hotel off the Strand,
where I found the noise by day and night
very afflicting, When we were not at the
conference, I spent long hours, among
ferumbs and blue-botte flies, in the coffe:
oom of this hotel, my Father being busy at
‘the British Museum and the Royal Society.
FATHER AND SON
‘The conference was held in an immense hall,
somewhere in the north of London. T re
‘member my short-sighted sense of the terble
‘istness of the erowd, with rings om rings of

im white faces fading in the fog. My
Father, us a privileged visitor, was obliged
with seats on the platform, and we were in
the heart ofthe fest really lange assemblage of
persons that I had ever seen

‘The interminable ritual of prayers, hymns
and adresse left no impressionon my memory,
but my attention was suddenly stung into life
by m remark. An elderly man, ft and greasy,
witha voice like a bassoon, and an imperturb
le assurance, was denouncing the spread of
Infidelity, and the lukewarmness of professing
Christians, who refined from betting the
wickedness at their doors, They were like the
Laodiceans whom the Angelof the Apocalypre
spewed out of his mouth. For instance, who,
the orator asked, is now rising to check the
coutburst of idolatry in our midst £ At thie
very moment," he went on, there is proceed
‘ng, unreproved, a blasphemous celebration of
the birth of Shakespeare, a lost soul now
suffering for his sins in bell!” My sensation
‘was that of one who lias suddenly been struck
fon the head; stars and sparks beat round me,

 

 

 

 

  

 
FATHER AND SON
[some person [loved had been grossly insulted
jn my prevence, I could not have felt tore
powerless in anguish. No one in that vast
Audience raised «word of protest nd my spirits
{ell to their nadir. ‘This, be it remarked, was
the earliest intimtion Uht had reached me of
the tereentenary of the Birth at Stratford,
fand T had not the least idea what could have
provoked the outbunt of outraged godliness.

But Shakespeare was certainly in the air.
‘When we retired tothe hotel that noon, my
Father of his own accord reverted to the
‘subject. I held my breath, prepared to endure
fresh torment. What he ssi however, tprisedand relieved me. Brother So-tn-so,"
the remarked, * was not, in my judgment, justified in saying whathe did. ‘The uncovensited
mercies of God are not revealed tous. Before
0 rasly speaking of Shakespeare as “a lost
onlin hel he should have remembered how
Tittle weknow of the poet's history. ‘The Bight
ofsalvation was widely disseminated in the land
luring the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and we
cannot know that Shakespeare did not accept
the stoneinent of Christin simple faith before
Ihe came to die.” "The concession will to-day
‘seem meagre to gay and worldly spirits, but
words cunnot express how comfortable it was

cy

 

 

   
FATHER AND SON
to me. 1 gud at my Father with loving
eyes aeros the cheese and celery, and if the
waiter had not been present I believe T might
hhave hugged him in my’ arms.

‘This mnecdote may serve to illstrate the
attitude of my conscience, at this time, with
regard to theology. I was not consciously in
ny revolt against the strict faith in which I
hod been brought up, but I could not fil to
be aware of the fact that literature tempted
ime tostray up innumerable paths which meandered in directions at right angles to that
direct strait way which Jeadeth to salvation.
1 fancied, if T may purwie the image, that T
was still safe up these pleasant lanes if 1 did
not stray far enough to lose sight of the main
roa, If for instance it had been quite certain
‘that Shakespeare Id been. irrecoverably
damnable and damned, it would searely have
‘been possible for me to have justified myself
jn going on reading Cymbeline. One. who
broke bread with the Ssints every. Sunday
‘morning, who “took a class” at Sunday school,
who mae, as my Father loved to remind me,
‘public weekly confession of his willingness
to bear the Cross of Christ, such an one could
hardly, however bewildering and tortaring the
‘ought, continue to admire a lst soul. Dut

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘that happy posiility of an ultimate repent:
ance, how teased me! could always console
rigself with the belie that when Shakespeare
wrote any passage of intoxicating beauty, it
‘vas just then that he was beyinning to breathe
‘the rapture that faith in Christ brings to the
snointed soul. Anditwas with alike casuistry
‘nt I condoned my other intellectual and personal pleasures.

‘My Father continued to be under the impresion that my boarding sehool, which he
never again visited after originally leaving me
there, was conducted upon the sume principles
fas his own houschold, Twas. frequently
tempted to enlighten him, but I never found
the courage to do so. As a matter of fact the
plety of the establishment, which collect to
Ft the sons of « lange number of evangeliclly
‘minded parents throughout that part of the
country, resided mninly inthe prospestas. It
proceeded no further than the practice of rex
‘ng the Bible loud, each boy in suoeessve order
ne vere in the early morning before breakfust.
‘There was no selection and no exposition;
where the last boy sat, there the day's reading
ended, even if it were in the middle of =
sentence, and there it begun next morning.

‘Such reading of "the chapter” was followed
FATHER AND SON
bya long dry prayer. T do not knove that this
‘morning service would eppour more perfunctory than usual to other boys, bt it astounded
‘and disgusted me, accustomed as I was to the
‘ministration at home, where my Father reid
“the word of God in 4 loud passicinnte voice,

emphasis, pausing for commen
phrase, and treating every phrase
as if it were part of « personal menage or of
‘eiling family history. Atschool,* morning
priyer" was & dreary, unintelligible exercise,
and with this piece of mumbeumbo, religion
forthe day began and ended. "The disretion
of litle hoys is extraordinary, Tam quite
certain no one of us ever reveled this fhct to
fur godly parents st home.

‘any one was to do this, it was ofcourse I
‘who should first ofall have tested.” But 1
Inud grown eautiousabout msking confidences,
One never knew how awkwardly they might
Aevelop or to what disturbing excesses of zeal
they might precipitously lead. Twas on ay
guard against my Pather, who was, all the
time, only too openly yearning that I should
proach him forbelp for connfort, for ghostly
counsel. St "deliente” though steadily
fining in solidity of constitution, I was lable
‘to severe chills and to fugitive neuralgic pangs

0

 

   

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
My Father was, slnost maddeningly, desirous
that these aictions should be sanctified to
‘me, and it was in-my bed often when T was
‘much bowed in spirit by indisposition, that he
‘ised to tsumph over me most pitilesly. He
retained the singular superstition, amzing in
‘nan of scientific knowledge snd long human,
‘experience, tht all pains and ailments were
directly sent by the Lord in chastisement for
some definite fault, and notin relation to any
physical cause. The result was sometimes
‘quite startling, and in particular 1 recollect
st my stepmother and T exchanged impre
sous of estonishient at my Father’ action
when Mrs. Goodyer, who was one of the
“Saints” and the wife of « young journey
‘man cobbler, broke her leg. My’ Father,
‘puzled for an instant as to the meaning of
this ecident, since Mrs. Goodyer was the
gentlest and most inoffensive of our church
‘members, decided that it must be because she
Thad made an idol of her husband, and he reduced the poor thing to tents by standing at
fier bed-side and imploring the Holy Spirit
‘to bring this sin home to her conscience.
When, therefore, {was il at home with one
‘of my tilling disorders, the problem of my
spiritual state always pressed violently upon

 

 
 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
nay Father, and this caused me nlite mental
Ainslie He would appear at my bedside,
‘wit solemn soleitde, and king” on is
trees woul eamestly pray slood thatthe prie ths Teed wing tg sate
Tnight graciously be made plain to mej and
then, tng, aid standing by ty pillow, he
‘would put me through a searching spiritual
Haran erent ee
indicated to me as bverved and eproated
on high

os be ca ee of eel ere
that he. thus ermexamined me; T think
he didsined. oct igntle quam a Bat
sO peee plete a
of uth in the put ofthis dogmn o of at,
Tukewarm seal in “taking up the cross of
heise” growth of inellectan prides
sree the nidons offences in eomequance of
‘ich ashe ouppond thecal nthe heed
Gee ecthats tod bese eat Dace
tmesenger t recall my straggling eonelenee
tots pain pth of duty

Wnt nate mn vary unconataie en ths
cccnsons was tay comcloueness Hat config:
‘nt to bed was Hardly an atiction atl. Te
pt ne fan the boron of bln se
Tit bed-room st bome, with any prety, sling

 

 
FATHER AND SON
stepmother lavishing luxurious attendance
‘pon me andit gave melong.unbroken days for
reading. Twas awkwardly ware that I stp
Ihed not the effrontery to approach the Throne
‘of Grace’ with « request to know for what sin
T was condemned to such a very pleasant disposition of my hours.

"The current of my life ran, during my
Sahool-days, most mervily and fully in the
holidays, when T resumed my out-door exerses with those friends in. the village of
whom T have spoken eatin, I think they
‘were more refined snd better bred than any’ of
iy schoolfellows, at all events it was among
these homely companions alone that I contineed to form congenial and sympathetic
‘relations. In one ofthese boys,—one of whom
Thave heard or seen nothing now for nearly
‘ageneration,—I found tastes singularly parallel
to my own, and we scoured the horizon in
search of books in prose and verse, but por
ticulaly in verse.

‘As T grew stronger in muscle, 1 was eapable
of aiding considerably to my ineome by an
exercise of my legs. T was allowed money for
the railway ticket between the town where the
school lay and the station nearest to my home.
‘But, if I chose to walk six orseven miles along

0

 

 
FATHER AND SON
the coast, thus more then halving the distance
by rail fom school house to. home, I might
spend as pocket-money the railway’ fie T thus
saved. Such considerable sums I fostered in
‘order to buy with them editions of the poets,
"These were not in those days, as they are now,
at the beck and call of every purse, and the
attainment of exch Tittle masterpiece was &
separate triumph, In particular shall ever
forget the excitement of reaching at Ist the
‘exorbitant price the bookseller asked for the
‘only, althotgh imperfect, edition ofthe poems
‘of S.'T, Coleridge. At lat Teould meet his
‘demand, and my fiend and I went down, to
consummate the solemn purehnse, Coming
away with our treasure, we read aloud from
‘the orange-coloured volume, in tums, as we
strolled along, until at last we sat down on
the bulging root of an elm-tree in « sechuded
lane, Here we stayed, in a sort of poetical
niroana, reading, reading, forgeting the
passage of time, until the hour afr neglected
‘midday meal was a long while past, and. we
hhad to hury home to, bread and cheese and
scolding

‘There was oceasionally some trouble about
‘my reading, but now not much nor often. 1
was rather adroit, and careful not to bring

  

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
prominently int sight anything of teary
Kind whieh could become stone of stumbling.
But, when T was nearly sixteen, I made pur
hase which trout me int sa tube, and
‘vas the caate af permanent wound tomy sl
In the book shop
ithe poetical works
‘of Hen Jonson and Christopher Marlowe were
‘aid to becombined.‘This | bought at length,
find I camied it with me to devour as 1 trod
the desolate road that brought me along the
sige of the elif on Saturday afternoons. Ben
Sonson 1 could make nothing of, bt when 1
turmed to" Hero and Leander,” Twas ited
ton beaven of passion and misc. Te was a
‘marvelous revelation of romantic bensty to
to, and as I paced slong that lonely and ex.
{hte high-way, with ts immense command
‘ofthese, and its peeps every now and then,
Aroogh slanting thickets, far down to the
Sow-white shingle, 1 ited up my voice,
Singing the verses, aT strolled along
Bi ofall rer td ae,
Sick the wl woul wender ebb =
soit ment on, and I thought had never read
tying 9 Tovely.—

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘Whoveteagly divine Muses sing —

ital seemed to my faneyintoxieating beyond

anything I had ever even dreamed of, since 1

Ihad not yet become acquainted with aay of

 

‘husiasm and exercise, I must needs, s0 soon
Thad eaten, seareh out my stepmother that she
right bes partner in my joys. Itisremarkable
‘to menow, anda disconcerting proof of my still
almost infantile innocence. that, havnginduced
her to settle to her Knitting, T began, without
hesitation, to read Marlowes voluptuous poem,
loud to that blameless Christan gentlewoman
We got on very well in the opening, but st
the episode of Cupid's pining, my stepmother’s
needles began nervously to lish, snd. when
we launched on the description of Leanders
person, she interrupted me by saying, rather
arply, Give me thit book, plese, T should
Tike to'read the rest to myself” I resigned
the reading in amszement, and was stupeied
to-seher takethe volume, shut i with # snap
tnd hide it under her needlework. Nor could
T extract from her another word on the
abject.

‘The matter passed from my mind, and 1

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘was therefore extremely alarmed when, soon
Rr my going to bed that night, my Futher
‘came into my room with » ale face end burning eyes, the prey of violent perturbation. He
set down the candle and stood by the bed,
fand it as some time before he could resolve
‘ona form of speech. ‘Then he denounced me,
unmeasured terms, for bringing into the
house, for possessing’ at all or reading, so
sbominable book. He explained thst my
Stepmother hud shown it to him,
Jud Tooked through it, and had b

“The sentence in his tirade which prinepally
affected me was this, He said, "You will
soon be leaving ns, and going up to lodgings in
London, and if your landlady should come into
‘your room, and find such a book lying about,
she would immediately set you dos as « pro:
Algate”” 1 did not understand this tall, and
it seems to me nov that the fact that Uhad so
very simply and childishly volunteered to read
the verses to my stepmother should. have
proved to my Father that T connected it with
ho ideas ofan iramoral nature,

Twas greatly wounded and offended, but
‘my indiguation as smothered up in. the
alarm nd excitement which followed the
news that T'was to go up to live in lodgings,

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
and, as it was evident, slone, in London.
OF this no hint or whisper hd. previously
reached me. On reflection, I ean but admit
‘hat my Father, who was litle accustomed to
seventeenth-century literature, must have
‘come across some string exposures in Ben
‘Jonson, and probebly never reached.“ Hero
fand Leander" at all The attstic effect of
Such poetsy on an innoeently pagan mind did
rot come within the eitele of his experience,
Hee judged the outspoken Elizabethan poets
no doubt, very much in the spet of the prob
Tematia! Tandady.

‘Of the world outside, of the dim wild
‘whislpoot of London, I was much afraid, but
T was nov ready to be willing to leave the
narrow Devonshire citele, to see the last of
the ve mud, of the dreary village street, ofthe
plethoric elder, to hear the last of the drawl
ng voices of the “Saints.” Yet I had a great
dlificuty in persuading myself that T could
fever be happy aveay From home, and again 1
‘compared my lot with thet of one of the
speckled soldiererabs that roamed about in
my Father's aquariam, draguing after them
‘great whorl-shells. "They, if by chance they
‘were turned out of their whelk-habitations,
tualed about. pale soft body in search of

 

 
FATHER AND SON
nother house, visibly broken-hearted and the
itims of every ignominiousnecident.

‘Myspirits were divided pathetically between
the wish to stay on, a guarded child, and to
proceed into the world, budding ma, and,
in my utter jgnoranee, T sought in rain to conjure up what my immediate future would be.
My Father threw no light upon the subject,
for he had not formed any definite ides of
‘what T could possibly do to eum an honest
living. As a mutter of fact T was to stay
‘nother year st school and home.

"This last year of my boyish life passed
rapidly and plensantly. My sluggish. brain
‘waked up nt lst and {sas able to study with
application. Inthe public examinations I did
pretty well, and may'even have been thought
something of a eredit to the school. Yet
formed no close associations, and I even con:
twived to avoid, as 1 had afterwards occasion
twreget, such lessons as were distasteful tome,
and therefore partiulanly valuable, But Freed
‘withunchecked voracity, and in several eurious
Airections. Shakespeare now passed into my
posession entire, in the shape of a reprint
‘more hideous and more offensive to the eyefight than would in these days appear concaivable. T made acquaintance with Keats

 
FATHER AND SON
who entiely captivated me: with Shelley,
whose Queen Mab” at first repelled me
from the theeshold of his edifice; and with
Wordsworth, for the exercise of whose magic
1 was sill far too young. My Bather presented me with the entire bulk of Southey’s
Stony verse, which T found it imposible to
penetrate, but my stepmother lent me “The
Golden Treasury," in which almost everything
seemed exquisite,

Upon this extension of my intellectual
powers, however, there did not follow any
spirit of doubt or hostility to the faith. On
the contrary, at frst there eames considerable
quickening’ of fervour. My prayers became
less frigid and mechanical; 1 no longer
‘avoided as far as possible the contemplation
of religious ideas; T began to search the
Scriptures for myself with interest and syim=
pathy, if scarcely with ardour. I begsn to
Perceive, without animosity, the strange
narrowness of my Father's system, whieh
Seemed to take into consideration only a
selected circle of persons, « group of disciples
peculiry illuminated and to have no message
‘whatever for the wider Christian community.

‘On this subject I had some instructive con‘versitions with my Father, whom T found not

295

   

 
FATHER AND SON
reluctant to have his convictions pushed to
thee logical extremity. He did not wish to
Judge, he protested: but he eould not admit
that « single Unitarian (or Socinian,” as he
preferod to say) could possibly be redeemed ;
And he had no hope of eternal salvation for
the inhabitants of Catholic countries. T
recollect his speaking of Austria. He ques
toned whether a single Austrian subject,
‘except, ashe sid, here and there a pions and
extremely ignorant individual, who hed not
‘comprehended the errors of the Papacy, but
hind humbly studied his Bible, could hope to
find eternal life. He thought tht the ordinary
Chinaman or savage native of Fiji lad «better
chance of salvation than any cardinal in the
Vatican. And even in the priesthood of the
Church ‘of England he believed that while
many were called, few indeed would be found
to have been chosen

T could not sympathise, even in my then
state of jgnoranee, with so rigid a conception
of the Divine merey. Little inclined as I was
to be sceptical, I stil thought it impossible,
that a seoret ‘of such stupendous importance
should have been entrasted to a litle group of
‘Plymouth Brethren, and have been hidden
from millions of disinterested. and pious theo
co .

 

  

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
fogians, ‘That the Tenders of European
Christianity were sincere, my Father did not
attempt toquestion. But they wereall of hein
fwrong, incorrect; and no matter how boly
Uhr lives, how selésscificing. their aetions
they would have to sulfer for their inex
facitude through sons of undefined torment.
He would speak with a solemn complacency
ofthe aged nun, who, after « long life of re

uneiation and. devotion, died at last, “only
to discover her mistake.”

Hlewho was so tender hearted that he could
not bear to witness the pain or distress of any
enon, however disagreeable or undeserving,
ras quite aequiescent in believing that God
Yrould punish human beings, in millions, for
rer, for a purely intellectual error of com
prehension. My” Fathers inconsistencies of
Perception sem to me to have been the result
Bh curios imegulasty of equipment. ‘aking
for granted, as he did, the absolute integrity
Of the Serptures, and applying to them his
trained scientific sprit, he contrived to stifle
‘ith a deplorable sicoes alike the funetion of
The imagination, the sense of moral justice,
find his own deep and instinetive tenderness
of heart

"There presently eame over mea strong desire

 
FATHER AND SON
to know what doctrine indeed it was that the
‘other Churches taught. 1 expressed a wish to
bbe mace aware of the prsctices of Rome, oF
at least of Canterbury, and I longed to attend
the Anglican and the Roman services. But
to do so was impossible. My Father did not,
indeed, forbid me to enter the fine parish
‘church of ou village, or the stately Paginesque
‘athedeal which Rome had just erected at its
side, but I knev that T could not be seen st
CGther service without his immediately knowIng it, oF without his being deeply wounded.
Although T was sixteen years of age, and
although I was treated with indulgence and
affection, I was still but a bind uttering in
‘the network of my Father's will, and ineapable of the smallest independent action.
resigned all thought of attending any other
services than those at our “ Room,” but T did
no longer regurd this exclusion a final one.
Thowed, but it was in the house of Rimmon,
hom which I now knew that I must inevitably
escape. All the liberation, however, which T
Aesired or dreamed of was only just so much
‘as would bring me into communion with the
‘outer world of Christianity, without divesting
Ime of the pure and simple principles of faith.

Of so much emancipstion, indeed, I now

0

  

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘became ardently desirous, and in the eontemplition of it T rose to a more considerable
egree of religous fervour thin I had ever
reached before or was ever to experience later.
Our thoughts were at this time ebundantly
exercised with the expectation of the imme
fliate coming of the Lord, who, as my Father
fand those who thought with him believed,
‘would suddenly appear, without the least
‘warning, and would catch up to be with Him
Jp everlasting glory all whom acceptance of
the Atonement ad sealed for immortality.
"These were, on the whole, not numeroos, and
cour belief was that the world, after afew days!
famazement at the total disnppesrance of these
‘Persons, would revert to its eustomary habits
bite, merely sinking more rapidly into amoral
torruption due to the removal ofthese souls of
SHC "This event an examination of propheey
fund led my Father to regaed as absolutely im
rminent, and sometimes, when we parted for
the night, he would say with a. sparkling
rapture in his eyes, «Who knows? We may
eet next in the ait, with all the cohorts of
Go's saints!”

"This conviction T shared, without « doubt
and, indeed, —in perfect innoceney, I hope, but
perhaps with a touch of slyness too—F pro
0

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
posed at the end of the summer holidays that
Tshould stay at-home. What isthe use of
my going to school! Let me be with you
‘when we vse to meet the Lord in the air!”
‘To this my Father sharply and firmly replied
‘that it was our duty to carry on our usual
vocations to the lst, for we knew not the
ment of His coming, and we should be
together in an instant om that day, how fa
soever we might be parted upon earth, Twas
ashamed, but his argument was logical, and,
‘as it proved, judicious. My Father lived for
nearly a quarter of a century more, never
losing the Jhope of “not tasting death,” and
as the Inst moments of mortality appronched,
the was bitterly disappointed at what he held
to be a seanty reward of his long fhith and
patience, But if my own ife’s work had been,
‘is T proposed, shelved in expectation of the
Lord's imminent advent, 1 should have «
bored the ground until this day.

“To school, therefore, etuened with a brxin
fall of strange discords, in a huddled mixture
of "Endymion" and the Book of Revelation,
John Wesley's hymns and Midrunmer
Night's Dream. Few boys of my age, 1
‘suppose, carried about with them such « confused. throng of immature impressions and

 

 

 

 

  

 

 
FATHER AND SON
contradictory hopes. 1 was at one moment
devoutly pious, at the next haunted by visions
of material beauty and longing for sensuous
Impressions, In my hot and sily brain, Jesus
and Pan held sway together, as in a wayside
chapel dseordantly and impisbly consecrated
to Pagan and to Christian rites, But for the
resent, asin the great chorus which so mar
‘elously portrays our double nature, «the
folding star of Hethlehem "was stil dominant,
T beoume more and more pietistic. Heginning now to versity, L wrote a tragedy in pale
Imitation of Shakespeare, but on a Biblical.
and evangelistic subject; and odes that were
imitations of those in" Prometheus Unbound,”
but dealt with the approaching advent of our
Lord and the rapture of His saints. My an‘wholesome excitement, bubbling up in
violent way, reached at last a climax and
foamed over

Te was «summer afternoon, and, being
row left very free in my movements, Lad
‘csenped:trom going out with the rest of my
schoolfllows in their formal walk in charge
‘of an usher. I had been reading ® good deal
‘of poetry, but my heart had translated Apolo
fand Bacchus into terms of exalted Chistian
‘ith. T'was alone and 1 lay on a sofa, drawn

 

 
FATHER AND SON
cross large open window at the top of the
‘school-house, it ® room which was used as a
study by the hoys who were “going up for
‘eximination.” 1 gazed down on wlabyrinth of
Gunlens sloping to the sea, which twinkled
Thintly beyond the towers of the town. Each
of these gardens held a villa in it, but all the
rear laniscape below me was drowned in
foliage, “A wonderful warm light of approaching sunset modelled the shadows and set the
Tread summits of the trees in a ich glow.
‘There was an absolute silence below and
round me, a magic of suspense secmed to
ep every topmost twig from waving

‘Over my soul there swept an immense
wave of emotion Now, surely, now the
great final change must be approaching. —T
‘guzed up into the fuintly-coloured sky, and
T broke ‘messy into speech, "Come
row, Lord Jestis;" I cried, “come now and
take me to be for ever with Thee in Thy
Paradise. ‘Tam ready to. come, My heart
js purged from sin, there is nothing that
‘keeps me rooted to this wicked world. Oh,
‘come now, now, and take me before I have
Joven the temptations of life, before 1 have
to go to London and all the dresdful things
tt happen there!” And Irased myself

 

 

 

 

 

    
PATHER AND SON
the soft, and leaned upon the window sll, and
‘waited forthe glorious apparition.

‘wat the highest’ moment of my
religious fe, the apex of my striving after
holiness. I waited awhile, watching’ and
then T had a litle shame at the theatrical
attitade T had adopted, although 1 was alone.
‘Stil guzed and still I hoped. ‘Then a little
breeze sprang up, and the branches danced.
Sounds began to rise from the roud beneath
‘me. Presently the colour deepened, the
evening came on. From far below there rose
‘to me the chatter of the boys returning home.
"The terbell rang—last word of prose to
shatter my mystial poetry. "The Lord has
rot come, the Lord will never come,” I
‘muttered, and in my heart the artificial edifice
of extravagant fuith began to totter and
crumble. From thit moment forth my
Father and T, though the fact was long sue~
cessfully eoncesled from him and even from
myself, walked in opposite hemispheres of
‘the soul, with «the thick o' the world between

 
EPILOGUE

‘Twis narative, however, must not be allowed
to close withthe son in the foreground of the
pices. If thas a value, that value consists in
‘what light it may eonteive to throw upon the
‘unique nnd noble igure of the father. With
‘theadvance of yeas, the characterises of thi
figure became more severely outlined, more
rigorously confined within setled limits. In
relation to the son—who presently departed,
sta very immature age, for the new life in
London-the attitude of the father continued
tw be ove of exteeme solicitude, deepening by
degrees into disappointment and disenchantment. He abated no jot or tittle of ‘his
demands upon human Baily. He kept the
spiritual cord drawn tight; the Biblical bearing-rein was incessantly busy, jerking into
position the head of the dejected neophyte.
‘That young soul, removed from the father's
‘personal inspection, begun to blossom forth

 
PATHER AND SON
crudely and ierogularly enough into new
provinces of thought, through tres layers of
‘experience. ‘To the painful mentor at home
in the West, the centre of anxiety wa still
the meck and docile heart, dedicated to the
Lord's service, which must, at all hazards and
‘with all defince of the rules of life, be Kept
tunspotted from the world.

‘The torment of a postal inquisition began
ivetly Twas settled in my London lodgings.
‘To my Father—with’ his ample leisure,
his plpitating apprehension, is ready
ppen,—the flow of correspondence  oflered
hho trouble at all; it was a grave but grat
fying occupation. To me the almost daily
letter of exhortation, with its string. of
questions about conduct, ity series of warn
ings, grew to be x burden which could
hardly be borne, particularly beomuse it ine
volved a reply as punctual and if possible as
full as itelf. At the age of seventeen, the
‘metaphysics of the soul are shadowy, and it is
‘a dresdful thing to be foreed to define the
‘exact outline of what is so undulating and so
geless. Tomy Father there seemed no
reason why I should hesitate to give answers
‘of full metallic ring to his hard and of-repeated
‘questions; but to me this eorespondence was

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
torture, When T feebly expostulated, when
T begged to be left n litle to myself, these
‘appeals of mine automatically stimolated, and
Indeed blew up into Reree flames, the ardour
of my Father's alam,

‘The letter, the only too-confidenty expected
letter, would lie on the table as T descended
to breakfast. It would commonly be, of
course, my only letter, unless tempered by a
cosy and chatty note from my dear and
forable stepmother, dealing with such per
feetly tranquilising subjects as the harvest of
roses in the garden or the state of health of
‘various neighbours. But the other, the solitary
letter, in its Unrentening whiteness, with its
exquisitely penned address—there it would
lie awsiting me, destroying the taste of the
bcon, reducing the favour of the tea to inSipidty. T might fatuously dally with it,
Timight pretend not to observe it, but there
it lay. Mefore the moming’s exercise began,
knew that it had to be read, and what
was worse, that ited to be answered. Use
Tess the effort to conceal from myself what
it contained. Like all its precursors, like
all ity followers, it would insist, with every
variety of appeal, on a reiterated declan
| tion that I stil fully intended, as in the

  

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘ays of my earliest childhood, “to be on the
Lond’ side” in everything.

In my replies, I would sometimes answer
precisely as I was desired to answer: sometimes I would evade the queries, and write
hout other things; sometimes T would tart
tupon the tormentor, and urge tht my tender
‘youth might be let sone, Tt little mattered
‘what form of weakness I put forth by way of
balling my Father's dseet, frm, unflinching
strength. To an appeal against the bondage of
‘correspondence of such unbroken solemnity
T would recsive—with whit x paralysing
ppromptitude !—such a reply as this:—

 

   

“Let me say that the solemnity "you eomplain of bas only been the expresion of tender
Anxiousness of a father's hear, that his only
chil, just turned out upon the world, and
‘ery far out of his sight and heasing, should
‘be walking in God's way. Recollet that itis
rot now as it fas whem you were at school,
‘when we had personal eommunieation with
You at intervals of five days —we now know
absolutely nothing of you, save from your
letters, and if they do not indicate your
spiritual prosperity, the deepest soliitudes of
four hearts have nothing to feed on. But 1

 
FATHER AND SON
will ry henceforth to trust you, and lay aside
my fears; for you are worthy of roy consience ; and your own God and your father's
‘God will hold you with His right band.”

(Over such letters as these Tam not ashamed
‘to say that I sometimes wept; the old paper
have just been copying shows traces of tears
shed upon it more thts forty yearn ago, tears
‘commingled of despair at my own feeblenes,
dlistaction st my want of wil, pity for my
Father's manifest and pathetic distres. He
‘would “try henceforth to trast" me, he si
‘Alas! the effort would bein vain: after day.
‘or two, afer a hollow attempt to write of
‘other things, the importanate subject would
recur; there would intrude again the ineeit‘Able questions about the Atonement and the
‘Means of Grace, the old anxious fears lest 1
was ‘yielding” my intimacy to agreeable
companions who were not “one with me in
Christ” fresh passionate entreaties tobe
assured, in every letter, that I was walking in
the lear light of God's presence.

Te seems to me now profoundly strange,
although I knew too little of the world to
remurk it at the time, tht these incessant
exhortations dealt, not with conduct, but with

 
FATHER AND SON
faith, Barier in this narrative I have noted
how disdsinflly, with what an austere pride,
iy Father refused to entertain the subject of
personal shortcomings in my behaviour. "There
‘were enoogh of them to blame, heaven knows,
but he was too lofty-minded a gentleman
to dwell upon them, and, though

Aeeply suspicions of the posbility of frequent
‘moral lapses, even in’ the very elect, he
refused to stoop to anything lke espionage.

T owe him s deep debt of gratitude for his
Deatful faith in mein thi respect, and now
that I was alos in London, at this tender
time of lie, “exposed,” as they say, to all
sorts of dangers, as defenceless as a Hedgling
that has been turned out of its nest, yet my
Father did not, in his uplifted Quixotism,
allow himself to faney me guilty of any moral
‘misbehaviour, but concentrated his fears
entirely upon my faith.

“Let me know more of your inner light
Does the candle of the Lord shine on your
soul?” "This would be the ceaseless inguiry.
Or, again, “Do you get any spnitual comppenionship with young men You passed
‘over lat Sunday without even a word, yet
this day i the mont interesting to me in your
whole week. Do you find the ministry ofthe

 

 

 

 

 
 

FATHER AND SON
Word pleasant, and, above al, profitable?
Does it bring your soul into exercise before
God! The Coming of Christ draweth nigh.
Watch, therefore and pray always, that you
may be counted worthy to stand before the
Son of Man.”

Tf L quote such passes as this from my
Father's letters to me, it is not that 1 seek
‘entertainment ina ontrast between hi
‘earnestness and the easisticl inattention and
provoked dstmctedness of a young man to
‘whom the real world now offered its inte
ting and stimulating seenes of animal and
intellectual life, but to eall ont sympathy, snd
perhaps wonder, atthe spectacle of so hind
Toman firmness as my Father's spiritual
aititude displayed,

“His aspirations were individual and metaphysical At the present hour, so complete
is the revolution which har overtumed. the
pritanism of which he was perhaps the latest
Surviving type, that all lasses of religious
perons combine in placing philanthropic
Activity, the objective attitude, in the fore‘ground. It is extraordinary how fhr-reaching:
the change hsb been, x0 that nowadays
religion which does not combine with its
subjective faith a strenuous labour Tor the

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
good of others i hardly held to possess any
religious principle worth holding.

hie propaganda of beneicence, this constant attention to the moral and. physical im.
provement of persons who have been neglected,
i quite recent 1s 4 leading feature of
religion, though indeed it seems to have formed
‘some prt of the Saviour's orignal design. Tt
‘was unknown tothe grestdivines ofthe seven‘teenth century, whether Catholic or Protes:
tant, and it offered but a shadowy attraction
to my Father, who was the last of the
diseples. When Bosset desired his hearers to
Tistn to the “rt de mistre @ Pontowr de nous,
qui dcorait nous fone le caur,” he started
new thing in the world of theology. We
may search the famous Rule and Exercises
of Holy Living” from cover to cover, and not
learn that Jeremy Taylor would have thought
that any activity of the distretvisitor oF the
Salvation lassie came within the eategory of
saintliness

“My Father, then, like an old divine, concen
‘rated his thoughts upon the itellestsal part
‘of fuith. Tn his obsession about me, he
Delieved that if my brain could be kept
tunaffeeted by any of the tempting errors of
the age, and my heart centred in the adoring

 

 
PATHER AND SON
love of God, all would be well with me in
perpetuity. He sas still convinced that by
Intensely directing my thoughts, he ould
‘compel them to How in a certain channel,
since he ad not begun to learn the Tesson, so
‘mournful for suintly men of his complexion,
that “virtue would not be virtue, could it be
sgiven by one fellow ereature to another.” He
Thad recognised, with reluctance, thit holiness
‘was not hereditary, but he continued to hope
that it might be compulsive, I was sil the
child of many prayers," and it was not to be
fonceded thit these prayers could remain
‘unanswered.

‘The great panacea was now, as always, the
study ofthe Bible, and this my Father never
ceased to urge upon me, Fe presented to
‘me a copy of Dean Alford's edition of the
‘Greck New Testament, in four great volumes,
and these he had had $9 magnificently bound
fn fll moroceo that the work shone om my
oor shelf of sixpenny pocts like a duchess
mong dury-maids. He extracted from me a
‘writen promise that T would translate and
‘meditate upon « portion of the Greek text
‘every morning betore I started for busines,
‘This promise I presently failed to keep, my
‘good intentions being undermined by an in
 
FATHER AND SON
vineible enna ; 1 eoneealed the derlition fom,
him, and the sense that T was deceiving: my
Father ate into my conscience like « eanke
‘But the dilemma was now before me that 1
must either deceive my Father in such things
‘or parayse my own character

My growing distaste forthe Holy Scriptures
Degan to occupy my thoughts and to surprise
as much ast seandalised me. My desire was
‘to continue to delight in those sured peges,
for which 1 still had an instinctive veneration.
Yet I could not but observe the difference
between the zeal with whieh T snatched at &
volume of Carlyle or Ruskin—sinee these
Imagiclans were now Rest reveling themselves
to-me—and the increasing languor with whiel
T took up Alford for my daily “passage.”
(OF course, although T did not. know it, and
believed my reluctance to be sinful the rea
reason why I now found the Bible so difficult
to read was my familiarity with its contents
"These had the coloutless triteness of « story
retold a hundred times, I longed for something new, something thet would gratify
curiosity and excite surprise. Whether the
facts and doctrines contained inthe Bible were
true or fale was not the question that appesled tome: it was rather that they had

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘been presented to me so often snd hed sunken
into meso far that, as some one has sid they
“lay bedridden in the dormitory of the soul,”
and'made no impression of any kind upon me.

Troften smazed me, and Tam still unable
to understand the tact, that my Father,
‘rough his long lfe—or till nearly the close
‘of it—continued to take an exger pleasure in
the text of the Bible, As I think I have
already ssid, before he reached middle life, he
Thad committed practically the whole of it to
‘memory, and if started anywhere, even in a
Minot Prophet, he could go on without a
break as long as ever he was inclined for that
‘exercise. He, therefore, at no time ean have
been assailed by the satiety of which 1 have
spoken, and that it eame so soon to me Tmust
‘ake simply as an indieation of difference of
temperament. It was not posible, even
through the dark glass of correspondence, to
deceive his eagle eye in this matter, and his
suspicions accordingly took another turn. He
conceived me to have become, orto be becom
ing, n vietin of the infidelity of the age.”

Tm this new dificulty, he appealed to forms
‘of maven Iitersture by the se of which the
least atznctive pages of Leviticus or Devterfonomy struck me as even thuiling, In

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
particular, he urged upon me a work, then just
published, called “The Continuity of Seripture” by William Page Wood, afterwards
Lord Chancellor Hatherley. I do not know
why he supposed that the lucubrations of an
‘exemplary lawyer, delivered ina style that was
like the trickling of suwdust, would sueceed
in rousing emotions which the glorious ¢h
tore of the Orient ad filed to awakens bat
age Wood had been « Sunday School teach
for thirty years, and my Father was always

nduly impressed by the acumen of plots
barristers,

"As time went on, and 1 grew older and
‘more independent in mind, my Father's
anxiety about what be ealed* the pitfalls and
sires whieh suround on every’ band the
thoughtless giddy youth of London” became
extremely peinfal to himself. By harping in
private upon these « ptflls"—which brought
to my imagination a funny rowgh woodeut in
an old edition of Bunyan, where a devil was
seen eapering over a srt of box let neatly into
the ground—he worked himself up into a
fame of mind which was nota ite trtating
to his hapless correspondent, who was now
“snared” indeed, limed by the pen like a bird
Dy the feet, and could not by any means

36

 

 
FATHER AND SON
escape. "Toa peck or a flutter from the bird
the implacable fowler would reply

+ You change me with being suspicious, and
eae Ueanuot deny the charge. Dut T can
‘appeal to your own sensitive spd thoughtful
‘ind for considerable allowance. My deep
find tender lose for you; your youth and
inexperience the examples of oer young
tmen' your distance from parental counsel
our absolve and painful ignorance ofall the
Aetais of your duly fe except what. you
yourself tell us:—tey to throw yourself into
the standing of a parent, and say iP my
suspiciousness is unresonsble. 1 reicingly
acknowledge thet from all 1 see you ate
Druing a virtuous, steady, worthy coun
‘ne god thing my sspiiownes does:—evet
and anon it brings out from you assurances,
‘which greatly rete and confor. me. And
sui, caries me ever to God's Throne of
Grace on your behalf Hly Job supected
that his sons might have sinned, and cured
God in thir heart, Was not his suspicion
‘much like mine, grounded onthe same
reasons, and productive ofthe same results?
For i drove him to God in iateresson
have eddued the example of this Patriarch

 
FATHER AND SON
before, and he will endure being looked at
again.”

In fact, Holy Job continued to be frequently looked at, and for this Patriareh 1
feame to experience « hatred which was as
YYenomous as it was undeserved. But what
{youth of eighteen would willingly be compared
With the sons of Job? And indeed, for my
part, I felt much more Tike that justly
‘exasperated character, Elihu the Buzite, of
the kindred of Ram.

‘As time went on, the peculine strain of
‘inquisition was relaxed, and T endured fewer
and fewer ofthe torments of religious corres:
ppondence. Nothing abides in one tense profein, and my Fee, reste os he mas,
fd ter peoecuptions. so
tnlroncope, his. piysolgia "reserehes, his
interpretations of propiey, fled up the hours
‘of is active and strenuous life, and, out ot his
Sight, became not indeed out of his mind,
Tut no longer ceaselessly in the painful fre:
‘ground of it Yet, although the reiteration of.
his anxiety might weary him a litle as it had
wearied me well nigh to groans of despair,
there was not fhe slightest change in his real
atitude towards the subject or towards me.

 

   

 

   

 

 
FATHER AND SON

1 have already had occasion to say that he
hud nothing of the mystic or the visionary
bout him. At certain times end on certain
points, he greatly desired. that signs and
‘wonders, such as had astonished and encour‘ged the infaney of the Christian Church,
Imight again be vouchsafed-to it, but he did
tot pretend to see such minsles himself, nor
give the slightest credence to others who
fiserted that they did. Te often congrat
lated himself on the fact that although his
‘mind dwelt so constantly on spiritual matters
it was never betrayed into any suspension of
‘the rational fanetions,

CCrossexamnination by letter slackened, but
fon occasion of my brief and usually summer
visits to Devonshire I suffered acutely fom
‘my Father's dialectical appetites, He was
‘surrounded by peasants, on whom the teeth of
his arguments could find no purchase. To
Him, in that intellectual Abdera, even an
‘unwilling youth from London offered epportunities of pleasant contest, He would delire himself ready, nay eager, for argument.
With his mental sleeves turned up, he would
‘adopt a ighting attitude, and challenge me to
‘round on any portion of the Scheme of
Grace, His alurity was dreadful to me, his

 
FATHER AND SON
well simed blows fell on what was rather a
bladder or pillow than a vivid antagonist,

“He ws, indeed most unfsriy bandieapped,
—Iwas naked, he in «suit of chain amour —
for he had sdopted « method which I thought,
tnd must still think, exceedingly unfair. He
sssumed that he Ind private knowledge of
the Divine Will, and he would meet my temporising arguments by asseverations—"So
Sure as my God liveth!” or by appeals to x

“But what does my Lord

tell me in Paul's Letter to the Philippians?"
It was the prerogative of his fith to know,
and of his character to overpower objection;
between these two millstones Iwas rapidly
‘ground to powder.

"These “disousions,” as they were rather

nically called, invariably ended for me in
disaster. 1 was driven out of my papier
Indché fstnesses, my canvas walls rocked mt
the fist peal from my Father's clarion, and
the foe pursued me aerosthe pains of Jericho
‘until T lay down ignominiously and covered
ty face. "I seemed to be pushed with horns
of iron, such a¢ those which Zedekiah the son
‘of Chenasnah prepared for the encouragement
of Ahab.

When I acknowledged defeat and cried for

0

 

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
quurter, my Father would become radiant,
and T still seem to hear the sound of his
fall voice, so thrilling, so warm, so. painful
to my overstrained nerves, bursting forth in
‘sort of benediction at the end of each of
‘these one-sided contentions, with “I bow my
knees unto the Fither of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that He would grant you, according to
the viches of his glory, to be strengthened
with might by His Spirit in the inner man ;
that Christ mey dwell in your heart by fit
‘that you, being rooted and grounded in love,
tay be able to comprehend with all saints
‘what is the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height, and to know, the love of Christ
‘which passeth knovledge, that you might be
filled with the fullness of God”

"Thus solemn, and thus ceremonious was my
Father apt to become, without a moment's
‘warning, on plain and domestic occasions;
abruptly brimming over with emotion like «
‘asin whieh an unseen How of water has fled
and over-filed,

1 earnestly desire that no trace of that
absurd solpity which is apt to taint reclleetons ofthis nature should give falsity to mine
My Father, let me say once more, hud other
interests than those of is religion. In par
‘61

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
ticular, at this time, he took to painting in
‘water-colours in the open ait, and he resumed
the assiduous study of botany. He was no
fnntieal monomaniae, Nevertheless, there
vas, in everything he did and said the central
‘purpose prevent. He acknowledged it plainly’;
“with me,” he confesed, “every question
‘assumes @ Divine standpoint and i not adequately answered if the judgment-seat_ of
‘Christ is not Kept in sight:

‘This was maintained whether the subject
‘under diseussion was poetry, or society, or the
Prussian war with Austr, or the stamen of a
wild flower. Once, atleast, he ws himself cot
Scious of the fatiguing eflect on my temper of
this insinteney for rising his great brown eyes
with a flash of Inghter in them, he elosed the
DBiblesuddenly aftera very lengthy disquisition,
sand quoted his Virgil to starting effect:

 

 

 

‘The inssteney of his religions conversation
‘was, probably, the less incomprehensible to me
‘on account of the evangelical training to
Which T had been s0 systematically subjected.
Twas, however, none the less intlerbly ik
some, and would have been exasperating,
heieve, even to a nature i which ® powerful
FATHER AND SON
sd genuine piety was inherent. ‘To my own,
im which a fecble and imitative faith was ex
piring, it was deeply vexatious, It led, alas
{oa great deal of bowing in the house of
Timmon, to much hypoeritieal ingenuity in
drawing my Fathers attention sway, if por
sible, the terrible subject was sen to be looming and appronehing. In this my stepmother
would sid and abet, sometimes producing
incongruous themes, likely to attract my
Pather aside, with a skill worthy of « parlour
conjure, and much to my admiration. If
however, she was not unwilling to come, in
this way, tothe support of my feebleness,
there wes no open collusion between us. She
sways described my Father, when she was
‘lone with me, admiringly, as one “whose
traipet gave no uncertain sound.” "There was
not a tinge of infidelity upon hee eandid mind,
Tut she was hutuan, and 1 think that now and
then she was extremely bored,

‘My Father was entirely devoid of the pradence which tamms away its eyes and passes
as rapidly as posible in the opposite direction.
"The peculiar kind of drama in whieh every
sort of social discomfort is weleomed rather
than that the characters should be happy when
inulty of * acting a le;" was not invented in

‘te

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
those days and there ean hardly be imagined
‘a figure more remote from my Father than
Thsen. Yet when I came, ata far later date,
to read “The Wild Duek,” memories of the
embarrassing household of my infaney helped
ime to realise Gregers Werle, with his determination to pull the veil of illusion away
from every compromise that makes life hear
able

Twas docile, I was plausible, 1 was any‘thing but combative; if my Father eould
Ihave persuaded himself to let me alone i he
could merely have been willing to. leave
my subterfuges and my explanations une
Analysed, all would have been well But he
refused to see any diference in temperament
between a lad of twenty and a sage of sixty.
Hee had no vital sympathy for youth, which in
itself bad no charm for him. He bad no com
passion for the weaknesses of immaturity,
and his one and only ansiety was to be at
the end of his spititual journey, safe with me
in the house where there are many mansions,
‘The incidents of human life upon the road to
lory were less then nothing to hima,

My Father was very fond of defining what
‘was his ovn attitude at thistime, and he was
never tied of urging the same ambition upon

68

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘me He regarded himself as the faithful
steward of « Master who might return st any
‘moment, and who would roquire to find every‘thing ready for his convenience. ‘That master
was God, with whom my Father seriously
Delived himself to be in relations much more
confidential than those vouchsafed to ordinary
pious persons. He awaited, with ansious hope,
“the coming of the Lord,” an event whieh
hie still frequently helieved to be imminent.
He would ileulate, by relerence to. pro:
phecies in the Old and New ‘Testament, the
exact date of this event: the date would pass,
without the expected Advent, and be would
be more than disappointed, —he would be
Jncensed, Then he would understand that he
‘mast have made some slight error in ealeulation, and the pleasures of anticipation would

‘Me in all this he used as a kind of

ferior coadjutor, much as x responsible
tnd upper servant might use a footboy. 1,
also, must be watching it was uot important
‘that I should be seriously engaged jin any
ahs of my own. 1 must be ready for the
Master's coming ; and my Father's incessant
‘ross-examintion was made in the spirit of
‘responsible servant who fdgets lest some

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
Ihumble but essential piece of household work
‘has been neglected

‘My holidays, however, and all my personal
relations with my Pather were poisoned by
this insistency. Twas never at my ease in his
company T never knew when T might not be
subjected to a series of searching questions
‘which I should not be sllowed to evade.
‘Meanwhile, on every other stage of experience
T was gaining the reliance upon self and the
respect for the opinion of others which come
naturally to @ young man of sober habits who
cexens his own living and lives his own Tile
‘For this kindof independence ny Father had
no respect or consideration, when questions of
religion were introduced, although he hand
somely conceded it on other points. And
‘ow frst there oveurred to me the relletion,
‘which in years to come Twas to repeat over
dnd over, with an ever sadder emphasis.
‘what 1 charming companion, what a delightful parent, what a courteous and engaging
fiend, my Father would have been, and
‘would pre-eminently have been to me, if it
Inad not been for this stringent piety which
rained i all,

Let me speak plainly. After my long experience, after my patience and forbearance, 1

 

 

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
have suely the right to protest against the
untruth (would that T could apply to it any
‘other word!) that evangelical religion, or any
religion in violent form, is « wholesome or
Yalible or desirable adjunet to human lie,
Tt divides heart fom heart. Tests up 2 vain,
‘himerial ideal, in the batren pursuit of which
all the tender, indulgent alffections, all the
fgenial play of life all the exquisite pleasures
find soft resignations of the body, al that en
ges and calms the soul, are exchanged for
wha i barsh and void and negative. Tt en‘courges stern nd gnoeant spirit of conden.
throws altogether out of goar the

healthy movement of the eonsienee;ieinvents
irtues which are sterile and cruel; it invents
sing which are no sins at al, but which darken
the heaven of innocent joy with futile clouds
fof remorse. ‘There is something horible, if
‘we will bring ourselves to face it, in the
finaticiom Uset can do nothing with. this
pathetic and fugitive existence of ours but
‘reat it abif it were the uncomfortable ante~
‘chamber toa palace whieh no one has explored
‘and ofthe plan of which we knove absolutely
nothing. My Father, iti true, believed that
The was intimetely acquainted with the form
‘and Turitute of this habitation, ad he wished

om

 

 
FATHER AND SON
‘me to think of nothing else but of the advantages of an eternal residence in it
"Then came a moment when my selfsufcieney revolted against the police inspection to
‘which my views” were incessantly subjected.
‘There ws a moming, in the hot-house at
home, smong the gorgeous waxen orchids
‘which reminded my Father of the tropics
his youth, when my forbearunee or my timidity
gave way. The enervated ar soaked with the
Intoxicating perfumes of all those voluptuous
flowers, may have been partly responsible for
my outburst. My Father had once more put
to me the customary interrgstory. Was I
‘walking closely with God"? Was my sense
of the eficney of the Atonement clenr and
sound! Had the Holy Seriptures still their
‘authority with me? My replies on this
‘occasion were violent and hysterical. T have
to clear recollection what it was that Fssid,—
deste not to real the whimpering sentences
in which I begged to be let alone in which
demanded the right to think for myself, in
‘which T repudiated the idea that my Father
‘was responsible to God for my seeretUnoughts

 

 

  

 

 

 

‘00s furnace of the conservatory, and buried my
FATHER AND SON
face in the cold grass upon the lawn. My
Visit to Devonshire, already near its else, was
hhoried to an end. I bed seareely arrived in
London before the following letter, furiously
despatched in the track ofthe fogitive, buried
itself ike an arow in my heart:

“When your sinted Mother died, she not
‘only tenderly committed you to God, but left
‘you alo as solemn charge to me, to bring
‘you up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord.” That responsibility I have sought constantly to Keep before me: 1 can truly aver
‘that it haw een ever before me—in mye
‘of's housekeeper, in my choice of «schoo, in
my ordering of your holidays, in my choice
‘afi seoond wife, in my choice of wn occupa
tion for you, in my choice of « residence for
‘you; and in multitudes of lesser things —
Thave sought to act for you, not in the light
‘of thie present world, bot with view to
Etenity,

“Before your childhood was past, there
seemed God's manifest blessing on our eare;
for you seemed truly converted to Him; you
confessed, in solemn baptism, that you had
ied and had been raised with Christ; and
ou were recived with joy into the Bosom

 
FATHER AND SON
‘of the Church of God, as one alive from the
dead.
All this fled my heart with thankfulness
snd joy, whenever I thought. of you :—how
could it do otherwise! And when I left you
in London, on that dreary winter evening, my
hart, full of sorrowing love, found its rehage
nd its resouree in this thought,—ehit you
were one of the lambs of Christ's lock ; sealed
with the Holy Spirit as His; renewed in heart
to holiness, in the image of God.

“For a while, all appeared to go on fairly
‘well: we yeamed, indeed, to discover more ot
heart in your allusions to religious matters,
‘but your expressions towards us were fii and
alflectonate ; your conduct, so fur as we could
fee, was moral and becoming you mingled
with the people of God, spoke of occasional
delight and proft in Hi ordinances and
‘employed your talents in service to Him.

“But of late, and specially during the past
year, there has become manifest a rapid pro=
izess towards evil. (I must beg you here to
ppeuse, and aguin to look to God for grace to
‘weigh what Iam about to say; or else wath
will ise.)

“ When you eame to usin the summer, the
heavy blow fell fall upon me: and Tdi

 
PATHER AND SON
covered how very far you had departed from
God, Te-was not that you had yielded to the
strong tie of youthful blood, and had fallen =
Victim to flesly lusts; in that ease, however
sd, your enlightened conscience would have
spoken loudly, and you would have found your
‘way back to the blood which cleanseth us from
All sin, to humble confession and selfabase‘ment, to forgiveness and to e-communion with
God. Tt as not this; it was worse. Tt was
‘hat horrid insidious indelity, which hed
already worked in your mind and heart with
terible energy. Far worsa, I say, because
thi was sapping the very foundations of fit,
fon whieh all true godliness, all real religion,
ust rest.

“Nothing seemed Jef to which I. could
appeal. We had I found, no common ground.
‘The Holy Scriptures had no longer any ithoity: you bad taught yourself to evade their
inspiration. Any. pasticular Onicle of God
hich pressed. you, you could easily explain
away; even the very charucter of God you
‘weighed in your Balance of fallen reason, id
fashioned it accordingly. You were thus
sailing down the rap tide of time towards
temity, without a single authoritative guide
(having east your churt overboard), except

   
FATHER*AND SON

what you might fashion and fonge on your
‘own anvil,—exeapt what you might gue, in
fact,

“Do not think I am spesking in passion,
snd using unwarrantable strength of words,
If the written Word is not absolutely autho
ritative, what do we know of God! What
‘ore than we ean infer, that i, guess,—as the
‘thoughtful heathens guessed, Plato, Socrates,
Cicero —from dim and mate surrounding
phenomena What do we know of Eternity ?
Of our relations to God? Especially of the
relations of u sinner to God? What of reconcilition? What of the capital question—
How can a God of perfect spotless rectitude
Aleal with me, a corsupt sinner, who have
trampled on those of His laws which were
‘even veritten on my conscience ?

‘his dreadful conduct of yours I had ine
tended, ater much prayer, to pass by in entire
silence; but your apparently sincere inquiries
ster the case of my sorrow have Ted me to
go to the root of the matter, and T could not
Mop short of the development contained in this
letter, Tt is with pain, not im anger, that 1
send its hoping that you may be induced to
review the whole course, of whieh this is only
4 stage, before God. If this grace were

 

 

 
FATHER AND SON
granted to you, oh! bow joyfully should 1
Dury all the past, and again have sweet and
tender fellowship with my beloved Son, 25
of old.”

‘The reader who has done me the favour to
follow this record of the clash of two temperaments will not fll to perceive the crowning
importance of the letter from which T have
Just made a long quotation, Tt sums up, with
the closest logle, the whole history of the
situation, and Tay lave it’ to form the
epigraph of this ttle book

‘Al that [need further say i to point out
that when such defiance is offered to the
intelligence of «thoughtful and honest young
‘man with the nomial impulses of his twenty:
fone years, there are ut two alternatives
Bither he must cease to think for himself; or
tis individualism must be instantly eonimed,
and the necesity of religious independence
must be emphasised

"No compromise its seen, was offered; no
proposal of truce would have been acceptble. Tt was a. ease. of Everything or
Nothing”; and thus desperately challenged,
‘the young man’s conscience threw of once for

 

 
FATHER AND SON
all the yoke of his “dedication,” and, as
respectfully as he could, without parade or
emonstrance, he took’ a human being’s
privilege to fashion his inner life for hinself,

 
RETURN CIRCULATION DEPARTMENT
TOmep 202 Main Library

 

TOANPEROD
HOME USE

F

 

 

 

 

7 u:DUEAS STAMPED BELOW

 

abggece At 0 25]

 

 

 

 

vo} notoura

 

Dera we

TON Bett, TAA t= |
‘64-4 ——

SAR OBE 8s IAN ET
— JAN 16 191

 

 

 

TRV OF CARO SREY

 
 
 

SEMEL Lany v6. semexey

WLAN

 
   

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
